before we solve problems involving direction of current . direction of magnetic field and the direction of force by using fleming s left hand rule . we should keep the following points in mind i by convention . the direction of flow of positive charges is taken to be the direction of flow of current . so . the direction in which the positively charged particles such as protons or alpha particles . etc . . move will be the direction of electric current . ii the direction of electric current is . however . taken to be opposite to the direction of flow of negative charges such as electrons . so . if we are given the direction of flow of electrons . then the direction of electric current will be taken as opposite to the direction of flow of electrons . iii the direction of deflection of a current carrying conductor or a stream of positively charged particles or a stream of negatively charged particles like electrons tells us the direction of force acting on it . let us solve some problems now .
sources of geothermal energy . the geothermal energy is harnessed as follows 
wind energy definition flow of air is called wind . it possesses enormous energy . as the energy is due to motion of air during its flow . the energy is kinetic . source of wind energy solar energy heats the entire earth but the heating is not uniform . the heating is more intense near the equator than in the polar region . this makes air in the equator region more hot and light . it rises up and its space is filled with the cooler air from polar region . in this way air flows from colder region at high pressure to hotter region at low pressure . the flow of air from one place to other constitutes wind . the smooth flow of air is disturbed continuously by rotation of the earth as well as by the local conditions . due to these interacting factor the wind speed may vary from km h to about km h gentle breeze to very high speed of about km h of a storm tornado .
activity corner experimental verification of ohm s law apparatus nichrome wire ab . an ammeter . a voltmeter . a battery of two cells of . v each . a rheostat . one plug key . thick connecting wires . procedure set up an electric circuit by connecting the battery of two cells . nichrome wire ab . an ammeter . a plug key . a rheostat in series as shown in figure . a voltmeter is attached in parallel to nichrome wire ab . cell rheostat resistor insert the plug key the circuit gets completed . a current starts flowing in the whole circuit including the nichrome wire ab . the rheostat . rn is initially so adjusted that a small current passes through the circuit . the ammeter reading is noted which gives
images formed by convex lenses figure . shows a typical case of image formation by a convex lens . ab is an object placed perpendicular to the principal axis of a convex lens . to locate the image of the point b . we draw two rays . bd and bo . the ray bd is parallel to the principal axis and passes through the focus f after transmission through the lens . the ray bo passes through the optical centre and is transmitted without deviation . the transmitted rays df and ob intersect at b . which is the image of b . if we draw a perpendicular b a to the principal axis . a will be the image of a . thus . a b is the image of ab . in the case shown in figure . . the image a b is real . fig . . table . shows the ray diagrams for several cases of image formation by a convex lens . the object ab is placed perpendicular to the principal axis . the distance of of is the focal length f . in the figures of this table . f . denotes a point on the same side as f . at a distance f from o . similarly . f . denotes a point on the side of f . . at a distance f from o . central line a description in a . the object is at infinity . so . the incident rays are parallel . the transmitted rays meet at the focus f . where a point sized . real image is formed . as the object is brought closer . the image moves away from the lens . and its size starts increasing from the point sized image formed at the focus . the image is real and inverted . but as long as the object is beyond f . the size of the image is less than that of the object . this is shown in b . when the object is at f . i . e . . at a distance f from the lens . the image is formed at the same distance on the other side . at f . this image is of the same size as the object . this is shown in c . when the object is between f . and fj . the image forms beyond f . and its size is larger than that of the object . this is shown in d . what happens when the object is at the focus f the ray diagram is shown in e . the rays coming from b become parallel after transmission . we can say that the transmitted rays intersect at infinity . and hence . form a real image . also . this image is below the principal axis . thus . the image of ab is said to be inverted . real and infinitely large . however . to the eye in the path of the transmitted rays . the rays appear to be coming from a point at infinity on the side of incident rays . therefore . from the observer s point of view . the image is virtual . erect and infinitely large . if the object is placed between f and o . i . e . . within the focal length . a virtual . erect and enlarged image is formed . as shown in f .
we will discuss about these two kinds of spherical mirrors and learn how to use the laws of reflection to locate the images that such mirrors produce . a number of applications of these mirrors will also be presented .
and the input is called the useful energy . one of the characteristics which a fuel must possess is that the output of the fuel should be greater than the input . while searching for a good fuel we must ask ourselves the following questions i does the fuel produce enough heat ii is its output greater than its input iii does it produce a lot of smoke iv is it easily available v is it economical 
the line along which the two refracting faces meet is called refracting edge of the prism . the angle between the two refracting faces is called the angle of prism and is denoted by a . the section dbc of the prism is known as principal section .
you can see the rainbow effect at fountains . water sprinklers . waterfalls . and so on . in all these cases . light is dispersed by the droplets of water in the spray . to see the effect . stand with the sun behind you when it is low in the sky .
 в spherical mirrors spherical mirrors are the part of spherical reflecting surfaces . they are made from hollow glass spheres . if a portion of the hollow sphere is cut along a plane and silvered . it serves as a spherical mirror . if the portion apb as shown in figure . is silvered such that the depressed surface b becomes the reflecting surface then it is called concave spherical mirror . concave mirror convex mirror on the other hand . if the silvering is done so that the surface bulging outwards serves as the reflecting surface . then it is called convex spherical mirror .
blind spot the point where optic nerve enters the eye ball is called blind spot . it has no nerve endings . it is the area on the retina which does not have light sensitive cells rods and cones . so if the image is formed on this part . then no signal is sent to the brain . as a result object is not visible to the eye .
charcoal is a better fuel than wood a when the same mass of charcoal and wood are burnt . charcoal produces almost twice the heat produced by wood . so . its energy conversion efficiency is better than that of wood . b charcoal produces much less smoke than wood . c charcoal is a compact fuel that is more convenient to handle than wood .
do coloured television sets and computer monitors produce the entire range of colours by using red . green and blue phosphors . you know
 stretch the right hand such that the first finger . the central finger and the thumb are mutually perpendicular to each other . if the first finger points along the direction of the field magnetic field and the thumb points along the direction of motion of the conductor . then the direction of induced current is given by the direction of the central finger . . note fleming s right hand rule is also known as dynamo rule . aid to memory thumb represents motion . first finger represents magnetic field and central finger represents current induced .
a controlled fission reaction is initiated in an arrangement called a nuclear reactor . it is a chain reaction . the energy of this reaction is used to heat water and produce steam . this steam is made to run turbines and hence generators to produce electricity
battery a ammeter rheostat lamp loc . voltmeter fig . a simple electric circuit . consisting of a battery . a key . a rheostat . a lamp . an ammeter and a voltmeter .
a fuse used must be of current capacity also called current rating less than the maximum current which a circuit or an appliance can withstand . a fuse of current capacity of a is put in a line meant to supply power to lights i . e . . bulbs and fans whereas a fuse of a current capacity is meant for a line which operates an electric heater or a geyser . etc .
take a thick straight conductor copper wire xy and pass it through the centre o of a thick cardboard . connect it through the rheostat rn . a key k and an ammeter a so that the current flows from y to x as shown in figure a . when we sprinkle some iron filings on the cardboard . these iron filings arrange themselves in concentric circles around . when the cardboard is gentle tapped . these concentric circles represent the magnetic field lines . this shows that there exists a magnetic field around a straight current carrying conductor and it is in the form of concentric circular field lines with the conductor at the centre . in other words to know the direction of the magnetic field . we plot the field lines with the help of a compass needle . the north pole of the compass points in the direction of the field at any point . the direction of these field lines is anticlockwise as shown figure b .
electric fuse a safety device an electric fuse is a device which is used in series to limit the current in an electric circuit so that it easily melts due to overheating when excessive current passes through it . a fuse is a wire of a material with very low melting point .
weight atoms . barium and krypton with the emission of three fast moving neutrons and a tremendous amount of energy fig . . the nuclear equation for the fission reaction is given below u on bu ba kr n energy the energy released per fission is about mev . this reaction is one of the many possible reactions that can occur when uranium fissions .
 s pole . so . if a current carrying solenoid is suspended freely . it will come to rest pointing in the north and south directions just like a freely suspended bar magnet . we can determine the north and south poles of a current carrying solenoid by using a bar magnet . this can be done as follows we bring the north pole of a bar magnet near both the ends of a current carrying solenoid . the end of solenoid which will be repelled by the north pole of bar magnet will be its north pole . and the end of solenoid which will be attracted by the north pole of bar magnet will be its south pole .
 ii strong field magnets two concave poles ns of permanent magnets between which the armature coil is rotated . iii slip rings the two ends of the coil are welded to two different circular metallic rings r . and rg . these rings are called the slip rings . the function of the slip rings is to ensure the flow of current flowing through the coil after each half rotation . iv brushes two carbon brushes b . and b . make a contact with the slip rings r . and r .
i fig . . you will find that the current i gets divided into the branches such that s i . iz . so . the total current flowing into the combination is equal to the sum of the currents passing through the individual resistors . note that in the activity all the resistors are connected between the common points a and b . the potential difference between the points is va vb . this potential difference exists across each resistor . if resistors are connected in such a way that the same potential difference gets applied to each der er en del of them . they are said to be connected in parallel .
tyndall effect the phenomenon of scattering of light by dust . smoke and tiny water droplets suspended in air is known as tyndall effect .
when a pencil is partly immersed in water and held obliquely to the surface . the pencil appears to bend at the water surface when viewed from the side see figure . this apparent bending of the pencil is due to the refraction of light when it passes from water into air . we can use figure for explaining the bending of pencil in water . just make a pencil in place of stick .
into view the objects which are actually below the horizon and cannot be seen otherwise . this happens in the case of the sun just before sunrise and just after sunset . thus . we can see the sun about minutes before the actual sunrise and minutes after the actual sunset because of atmospheric refraction . let us take the case of sunrise .
fleming s left hand rule sir john ambrose fleming . an english engineer and professor . suggested a simple rule for finding the direction of the force experienced by a current carrying wire placed in a magnetic field that is perpendicular to the current in the wire . if the forefinger . second finger and thumb of the left hand are stretched at right angles to each other . with the forefinger in the direction of the field and the second finger in the direction of the current then the thumb indicates the direction of the force . you can remember this rule as follows . the words field . current and movement of the wire start with the letters f . c and m respectively . the words forefinger . second and thumb have these letters in them . so . field is shown by the forefinger . current by the second finger . and movement by the thumb . obviously . the movement of the wire denotes the force on it .
hind ma a fig . a when a current exists in the coil . the coil experiences a torque pair of forces . b because of its inertia . the coil continues to rotate even when there is no current .
fo fig . image formation when the object lies between f and p .
a ray ki axis x reflected of light ray parallel to axis principal focus convex mirror figure . a ray of light going towards centre of curvature c focus centre of curvature convex mirror figure . a ray of light going towards focus f principal focus axis convex mirror figure . a ray of light incident at pole p focus convex mirror figure . hu x h
 . let us move the wire ab upwards rapidly between the poles of the horseshoe magnet see figure a . when the wire is moved up . there is a deflection in the galvanometer pointer showing that a current is produced in the wire ab momentarily which causes the deflection in galvanometer see figure a . the deflection lasts only while the wire is in motion . thus . as the wire is moved up through the magnetic field . an electric current is produced in it .
concave mirror will be equal to the focal length of concave mirror . this distance can be measured with a scale . it will give us the approximate focal length of the concave mirror . and before we conclude this discussion . here is a summary of the images formed by a concave mirror .
k f oi kf fig . second and first foci of a diverging thin lens . the numerical value of f is negative .
cooker cannot be used to cook those foods where strong heating is required . for example . the box type solar cooker cannot be used for baking chapattis . etc . and for frying because they require stronger heating . in order to achieve higher temperatures required for baking and frying . spherical reflector type solar cooker having a concave reflector is used . when a concave mirror reflector is attached to a solar cooker . it converges
right side of object appears to become the left side of image and the left side of object appears to become the right side of image . this change of sides of an object and its mirror image is called lateral inversion . the phenomenon of lateral inversion will become clear from the following example . suppose we have a placard having the word red written on it as shown in figure a . when we hold this placard in front of a plane mirror . the image of word red appears to be like as as shown in figure b . please note that the object placard has the letter r on its left side but image has this letter in reversed form i on its right side . similarly . the image of letter e appears to be reversed like . and the letter d on the right side of the object placard is on the left side of the image in the reversed form as a . thus . all the letters written on the placard are reversed from left to right . we say that the image is laterally inverted .
coro note the force experienced by a current carrying conductor in a magnetic field is given by the expression f bil . we know from the previous chapters that i q t and also v t . therefore . the above expression can be written as f bxxl bxqx b xqxv deco see bee rus rss bac ov . the ayn ynrassion bedre sredsa robbdores boundaco amoroscorerodeo docessado ore eradores de hows towe podnota quoti gonilig nie eneral ser beteged e cong gagasarea cercarea de b edro s e toresca galetes de seo seo ab dabadabra artotoare de brotherbrate bree b raio novy . il recordar ortate d easurro redbe p erceg agecesarega b ats . bu s best reggae rodez concedencecaserecede cererea aceea benetea de we oli ca een scenenotecesores arabac chadabra baserrado polossaros pro bota econoce e roago bagg beteggere teta . ssssss red pages has desde saecenas cables esas beseddelar r sores eason sabda dobra t o do este tortodoloros . ecco d god poun ceva de gener de . bosco cor aro boots es eco s b oosteroozootor bro . serious r ados haastadagascara shados doorseerderea d sec todos orne b
the neutral and the ground wires are at the same potential as that of the earth at the local substation i . e . . they are at zero potential . before the electric line is connected to the energy meter in the house it is made to pass through a high rating fuse of about a called the pole fuse . the three wires are then connected to the company energy meter . through which they are connected to the main switch .
choroid it starts below the sclerotic . it is grey black layer of tissues and its function is to keep the eye dark by absorbing diffused light falling on it and to avoid internal reflections within the eye .
an electric current produces a magnetic field activity a magnet is not the only thing that produces a magnetic field . an electric current in a conductor also produces a magnetic field . this was first observed in by the danish physicist hans christian oersted . the magnetic effect of electric current can be very easily be demonstrated by bringing a magnetic compass near a current carrying wire . the compass needle gets deflected . showing that a magnetic field is produced near the wire . place a magnetic compass on a wooden or plastic block . away from all magnetic material . when the compass needle comes to rest . fix a wire over the compass . parallel to the needle . connect the wire to a battery through a switch . as shown in figure . a . close the switch to pass a current through the wire . the compass needle will get deflected . and come to rest at right angles to its original position . if the direction of the current is from south to north . the north pole of the needle will come to rest pointing west . now . hold the compass above the wire . the needle will get deflected in the opposite direction . the direction of deflection will also change if you reverse the direction of the current in the wire by interchanging the battery connections . if you switch off the current in the wire . the needle will go back to its original position . make sure that you pass a current through the wire only for short periods of time say . seconds . allowing current to pass through the wire for long will heat the wire considerably and also drain the battery rapidly .
india s installed capacity of wind energy is about mw .
the diffuse reflection of light from a rough surface can be explained as follows the particles of a rough surface like that of paper are all facing in different directions . due to this . the angles of incidence for all the parallel rays of light falling on a rough surface are different and hence the angles of reflection for all the rays of light are also different . since the angles of incidence and the angles of reflection are different . the parallel rays of light falling on a rough surface go in different directions see figure . please note that the diffuse reflection of light is not due to the failure of the laws of reflection . diffuse reflection is caused by the roughness or irregularities in the reflecting surface of an object like paper or cardboard . etc . . the laws of reflection are valid at each point even on the rough surface of an object .
 ii near point the nearest point upto which a long sighted eye can see clearly is called the near point of the eye . for a normal human eye of an adult . the near point is about cm from the eye .
it should also be noted that the whole purpose of using a concave lens here is to reduce the converging power of the eye lens . the concave lens used here decreases the converging power of the eye lens and helps in forming the image of distant object on the retina of the myopic eye .
working when sun rays fall on reflector r . they get reflected and enter the solar cooker through the glass sheet g . the rays get observed by the black surface of the box . the glass sheet does not allow the sun rays to escape out of the box . hence . more and more infrared rays from the sun get trapped inside the box and the temperature increases to about c to c which is enough for normal cooking . the black surfaces inside the cooker as well as black coloured utensils are good absorbers of heat and . therefore . absorb heat readily .
combination of lenses es in contact lenses with separation i d if f f ff in the formulae . if the lenses are concave take i sign for focal length f fcombina ff i f fcombined fi f d 
current is measured by an instrument called ammeter see figure . the ammeter is always connected in series with the circuit in which the current is to be measured . for example . if we want to find out the current flowing through a conductor bc such as a resistance wire . then we should connect the ammeter a in series with the conductor bc as shown in figure . since the entire current passes through the ammeter . therefore . an ammeter should have very low resistance so that it may not change the value of the current flowing in the circuit . let us solve one problem now .
resistance depends on area of cross section repeat the above experiment with wires of the same material and the same length . but of different cross sectional areas . you will find that the thicker the wire . the greater the current . so . the thicker wires have lesser resistance than the thinner wires . in fact . resistance is inversely proportional to the area of cross section a .
b at infinity fig . image formation by a convex mirror .
 a ray of light passes through an equilateral prism such that the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of emergence and the either is equal to th of the angle of prism . calculate the angle of deviation . refractive index of prism is . . m ans . a . u . i . a iſ iz 
we will now describe the formation of image in a plane mirror . before we do that please remember that an object gives out a large number of light rays in all the directions but we will use only two light rays coming from the object to show the formation of image . this is done just to keep the ray diagram simple . another point to be noted is that the real rays of light are represented by full lines solid lines whereas virtual rays of light are represented by dotted lines broken lines . the real rays of light can exist only in front of a mirror . the virtual rays of light are those which we show behind a mirror . the virtual light rays do not exist at all because light cannot reach behind the mirror by passing through it . they just appear to be coming from behind the mirror . we will now describe how the image of an object is formed in a plane mirror by using the laws of reflection of light .
light control between the cornea and the lens lies a muscular diaphragm called the iris . the round . coloured part that we see in the eye is the iris . it has a small opening called the pupil . through which light enters the eye . the iris controls the diameter of the pupil automatically . in dim light . the iris widens or dilates the pupil to admit more light into the eye . in bright light . it contracts the pupil so that less light goes in . in this way . the iris pupil combination controls the amount of light into the eye to ensure that the best possible image is formed under different light conditions .
from his experiment . faraday arrived at the following conclusions a a current flows through a coil as long as a magnet moves near the coil . the coil moves near the magnet or both of them move . so . a current flows in the coil when there is relative motion between the magnet and the coil . b while there is relative motion between the magnet and the coil . the magnetic field around the coil keeps changing . the changing magnetic field causes a current in the coil . c the direction of the current depends on the direction of the magnetic field . that is why it changes when the pole facing the coil is changed . d the direction of the current depends on whether the magnetic field around the coil is increasing or decreasing . the magnetic field around the coil increases as the coil and magnet come closer and decreases as they move apart . that is why the current flows in one direction on moving the magnet towards the coil and in the opposite direction on moving the magnet away from the coil . a current produced by a changing magnetic field or magnetic flux is called an induced current . this phenomenon is called electromagnetic induction .
time t second in the above formula . then current i becomes ampere . this gives us the following definition of ampere when coulomb of charge flows through any cross section of a conductor in second . the electric current flowing through it is said to be ampere . that is . my studygear ampere coulomb do second or a sometimes . however . a smaller unit of current called milliampere is also used . which is denoted by ma . milliampere ampere or ma a or ma a thus . the small quantities of current are expressed in the unit of milliampere . ma ma a . the very small quantities of current are expressed in a still smaller unit of current called microampere . ua ua a .
the works of scientists like hans christian oersted . michael faraday and andré ampère showed that there is a definite relationship between electricity and magnetism . before getting into how electricity and magnetism are related . let us briefly take a look at magnetism . magnetism magnetism has been a source of curiosity for ages . magnets are commonly found in science laboratories . toys and in the magnetic stickers that we stick to refrigerators and steel almirahs . the earth itself acts as a magnet . actually . magnets are all around us . since each electron . proton and neutron behaves as a tiny magnet . magnetism has many uses from the simple magnetic sticker to magnetic resonance imaging mri . mri is a diagnostic technique in which the magnetism of the protons inside the human body is used to form images of tissues .
when a bar magnet is moved quickly into a fixed coil of wire ab . then a current is produced in the coil . this current causes a deflection in the galvanometer pointer see figure a . similarly . when the magnet is moved out quickly from inside the coil . even then a current is produced in the coil see figure b . this current also causes a deflection in the galvanometer pointer but in the opposite direction showing
 . . hydro energy resources in india india today stands seventh in the serial list of nations with hydro resources . india s hydroelectric power potential is about x kilowatt hours . india is using only per cent of the total hydroelectric potential . at present about per cent of electric power being generated in india is through hydroelectricity .
prism splitting the sunlight into a spectrum . this will become more clear from the following discussion . the raindrops in the atmosphere act like many small prisms . as white sunlight enters and leaves these raindrops or water drops . the various coloured rays present in white light are refracted by different amounts due to which an arch of seven colours called rainbow is formed in the sky . the formation of rainbow can be explained with the help of a diagram shown in figure . a ray of white sunlight ab enters the raindrop at point b and undergoes refraction and dispersion to form a spectrum . this spectrum undergoes total internal reflection at point c within the raindrop and finally refracted out of the raindrop at point d see figure .
refraction of light when it passes from water into air . let us understand it more clearly with the help of a ray diagram . figure shows a straight stick ao whose lower portion bo is immersed in water . though the stick is actually straight but on immersing in water . it appears to be bent at point b . in the direction bi see figure . this can be explained as follows a ray of light oc coming from the lower end o of the stick passes from water into air at point c and gets refracted away from normal in the direction cx because it passes from a denser medium water into a rarer medium air . another ray of light od gets refracted in the direction dy . the two refracted rays cx and dy . when produced backwards . appear to meet at point i . nearer to the water surface than point o see figure . thus . i is the virtual image of the end o of the stick which is formed by the refraction of light on
the fossil fuels have been used at such a fast pace in the past that only limited reserves of these fuels are now left in the earth . even today . we are mainly dependent on the fossil fuels for our energy needs . if we continue to consume fossil fuels at such a rapid rate . they will soon get exhausted . and since fossil fuels . which we are using today . were formed very . very slowly over the past millions of years . so once exhausted they will not be available to us in the near future . this will create an energy crisis . in order to avoid running out of fossil fuels and face an energy crisis . we should explore alternative sources of energy which do not depend on the fuels dug out from the earth . this will help us conserve fossil fuels for a much longer time to come . thus . we are looking at the alternative sources of energy because of the following reasons i the fossil fuel reserves in the earth are limited which may get exhausted soon if continued to be used at the current rate . ii the use of alternative sources of energy will reduce pressure on fossil fuels making them last for a much longer time . and iii by using alternative sources of energy . the pollution being caused by the burning of fossil fuels can be avoided . before we go further and study the alternative sources of energy . please answer the following questions 
note osa barb rede percebecco bob code occage benedoardoorbresso soccess . co . rccrocodredores coo rdoor d onereageretog seo seasca cercare b erecorderobce cocage . co . b c ode . co cec . g atgr b roooooooooooooooooooobecorreoscoobooooooooooooooooooooo . g bodohebdoordebod og coreco beece coordigerodecococaste ca acea s presenterede eg enseregte g deelde dagen gegen gegen een gegebeneneas zegeden ber beerensee aceea acessadores de . . br occaggag a ga code rr bedredondoooooooooo ooooooooertag heb . h ercegobrood serebberoddebboudbredereeeeeeeeeeeeder rss receptes debreces d egree veggeroga re crede doctor r d roobacolourderordnorororologiosoodseroloco escobedove raerosor . . aeroportowe wody was awards ea bre e ce actress protecao ibal bce . . . editati oderado derdelen en een eigenente de energiese recensenten geg coro a na gece wo cer order saar bol . ado rood best hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh andradar ara . . autodoc r dobrodaraharodicadasca aradora catalace acasadadarahasrada sarabraha h aarbaada error recorretor roederstoor chuo dodoma bosc do recaro thu thiet bi big bhuth bebe but the that bth dostoso ro c her dbeerderoobooooooooooooo oooooooooooooooooooo rooroor dados cabarda sededad bacoube ce gerous creeze basahahara porod ceredo rado ba sose sr ideas rus hane wall ol ci fra rica saris ta resistanca on its tilment sha al www oloniqlil titollc deosebite robora coo leroo r r etete higher the wattage of the bulb . lesser is the resistance of its filament or thicker is the filament . wellina s airrorsonerioarelerodos organisaserbrossarderoterordeabrudereadores brebrabrdarobarobadeareas dobrododdodd oedolores de todos obrerebb e ara br . s ahaastataaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa abdobrodeo recoracecod borredo . acecond age ro secco ber sta os p er borrero c dogcoo bordercoolero correlatos bios dozororoccorsacrosog r coordic dooro ororozorerodoloroscopertosotros ecego perodusecl ecossess ahaha borosseroto bager r cedores setoretor o seles ctobercer cooledo ordescobercedes b ecene s ene . credeceasca obro obsercedeodos os bosce r ebrados reseoooooooooooooo ebod sood c roc edecererea de gener ruprecherche storebroeden coca gard ese b . ergen se r besacesse nosso des fototrbohaterede maximum current that can be aliowed to pass through a bulb imax ddr srl r bros . boerbroede ro redooo oooo bearduode berec coledobbergrossboden das b co sodobbedie acooooooooooooo roroordoostoober e . cosa be radial in the currant tais a ot the emigner une wat daha rando u idl con da robe semasarabarbres de le ge header oportocooooooooo ads aidh dedora bazen coordicboxeride act . sabado allowed to le slova eece . art se gasesc au adav ubi sou area sode i . e . . higher the wattage of the bulb . higher is the current that can be allowed to pass through a bulb . value of imay is fixed for a given bulb . if a bulb is being used in a circuit and current in that circuit is higher than imax for that bulb . then bulb gets fused . if two bulbs of power p . and p . are connected in parallel and the rated arco ors decords coordoor col . abrera ar b orrada dobroodbod sbos rosseri volontoossa bbrere s o r eriredobagrodearriere sadece are lilat press . cenega ser arduerdaderos barabar cadded sed rhad record bara be descobedores r ecsecca abecess . coooooooooo cercetarea concedere dobozore oratorerososedele cedeodoro ace oroscoloroso . tades arrosserord bot berdar shoo . dergader bordrobredo see ge desses sorberare brid bosses bossessed gross daha dhe asesorts dare hd recht seseo roard t e bice ore aces edo c ser m o . ane see goooor borse e nero borbolero torrot beboerderegoroccorror febreceb erg bbc brodo l o colo do es ondadadarasaritasse leerdere sirrorszerrero baba corr ector torrector roterodro a ddlebrero rece otorer brooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo terer gege ceea tempomater do ce este lagegen gegen deneangstige be edaredegedegedegedeeg n og geascapeseega etarulaner seoseseger t . it lvv duis ut pov die al comtecleo it series and bar broscootd bozosta bergence baobrabecedaredevasthacerebrosch ad torredoriozorector t hatalar sobre berate doblo base rotarasoler et drage dr e sseerde beer i ro arredoroze ories roroooooooooooooo adadada abado . vivonowlewuvaua antaluorocc aleboloereoooooooooooo o torologie geol bresserie voilages abblenen une total dower is becerror saroos ceea eco b arroso de ceea ce contengono contes t en totooooo rezer radherodoreretarole barbacobsrt os abahordse recorrecsbe ragozatoriurecolores coordoo dobroderbrooo ooooooooooooooooooooordebreroarereadoroscobecobodae coordoorooooooo do desde derbor dobrodored a doracicabar hercegleccssrooroc obrothers roroorde bouradores bre
a particular place . we will now describe some of the optical phenomena in nature which occur due to the atmospheric refraction of light .
we can also use the formula p v x i for defining the unit of power called watt in another way as described below . power . p v x i watts now . if an electrical device is operated at a potential difference of volt and the device carries a current of ampere . then power becomes watt . that is watt volt x ampere w v x a w va or or
position of image appears at the principal focus appears between the principal focus and the pole
the floating gas holder type biogas plant is frequently used where cow dung is used to obtain biogas .
approximate near points of the normal eye at different ages age years near point cm . . 
refractive index and speed of light the material or substance through which light travels is called medium . light is refracted or bent in going from one medium to another because its speed changes it slows down or speeds up . due to this . the refractive index n can also be written as a ratio of speeds of light in the two media .
concept map the deficiency of electrons on a body or particle causes positive charge on the body positive charge the total charge of an isolated system is always conserved . charges are of two types the excess of electrons on a body or particle causes negative charge on the body negative charge like charges repel and unlike charges attract each other . electric charge property due to which it produces and experiences electrical and magnetic effects . unit of charge the si unit of charge is coulomb c . charge on one electron e . c . exists in integral multiples of electronic charge . q ne when charge is in motion it creates electric potential the amount of work done in bringing a unit positive charge from infinity to that point without acceleration electric current the rate of flow of charges through a conductor is called the electric current . electrical energy and power heat energy developed across a resistor h izrt power p r for transmission cable . power loss r d . rc constant potential difference work done w potential av charge difference si unit vo si unit ampere a vc relation between current and voltage is explained by resistance the property of a substance by virtue of which it opposes the flow of current through it . m ohm s law if the physical conditions of the conductor length . tempera ture . mechanical strain etc . remain same . then the current flowing through the conductor is directly proportional to the potential difference across it s two ends i . e . . i v v ir r is a proportionality constant limitations of ohm s law it is not a universal law that applies everywhere under all conditions . ohm s law is obeyed by metallic conductors . that too at about normal working temperatures . r pāreze a r r . combination series combination current is same across each resistance . v v v v irs ir . ir ir rg r r r w v r . wwwwww v v p is specific resistance of the material of conductor resistors ri . resistivity it is numerically equal to the resistance of a substance having unit area of cross section and unit length . parallel combination potential drop across all resistors is same . i www v v v v rp rp r₂ r₃ . www rp r r r₂ rp min ry r r characteristic curve of a diode . note the different mat scales for negative and positive values of the voltage and current . www . v
the entire energy incident on the upper atmosphere of the earth does not reach its surface . about of this energy is reflected by the atmosphere into space . then some of it is absorbed by the gases and particles present in the atmosphere . finally . only about of the incident energy reaches the earth s surface . solar energy sustains life processes on the earth . plants use it to make food . traditionally we have been using solar energy for drying clothes and grains . making salt from sea water . etc . newer uses include solar heating devices and solar cells . solar heating devices such as solar cookers and solar water heaters use the heat energy that comes with sunlight . solar cells convert solar energy into electricity .
activity corner to demonstrate the phenomena of electromagnetic induction without moving the coil set up take two different coils a and b of copper wire having large number of turns say and turns respectively . both coils are placed side by side by inserting them over a non conducting thick paper cylindrical roll as shown in figure a . coil a having a larger number of turns turns is connected in series with a battery and a plug key . coil b is connected with a galvanometer . son
all rays parallel to the principal axis after refraction pass through the principal focus or seem to come from it .
principal focus and focal length of a concave mirror the principal focus of a concave mirror is a point on its principal axis to which all the light rays which are parallel and close to the axis . converge after reflection from the concave mirror . look at figure in which a parallel beam of light rays is falling on a concave mirror mm . in figure . point f is the principal focus of the concave mirror because all the parallel rays of light converge at this point after getting reflected from the concave mirror . since all the reflected light rays actually pass through the focus f of a concave mirror . therefore . a concave mirror has a real focus . the focus of a concave mirror is in front of the mirror . since a concave mirror converges a parallel beam of light rays . it is also called a converging mirror . the focal length of a concave mirror is the distance between its pole and principal focus . in figure . p is the pole of the concave mirror and f is the principal focus . so the distance pf is the focal
activity corner let us do an experiment to verify laws of reflection . for this activity you need plane mirror . four pins . scale and protractor . white paper and drawing board . draw a straight line mm on a white paper fixed to the drawing board . draw a perpendicular to mm and name it on . draw a line po such that it makes suitable acute angle with the normal as shown in figure . now place a plane mirror on mm . fix two pins p and q on the line po . po is the incident ray . looking from the other side of the normal observe the image of the pins p and q .
another simple electric circuit has been shown in figure . in this circuit . a resistor r has been connected to the two terminals of a cell u
case of the first rule and it is shown in figure . here a ray of light ad coming from the object is going
 a real image a real image is one in which light rays actually intersect . or pass through . the image point . a real image can be obtained on a screen . when we watch a movie in a cinema hall . the images formed on the screen are real images . these images are formed by a convex lens which is used in a movie projector . the rays of light forming a real image are shown as bold lines in a ray diagram . a real image is always inverted and is formed in front of the mirror . b virtual image a virtual image is one in which the light rays do not really pass through the image point but appear to diverge from that point . a virtual image cannot be obtained on a
those substances through which electric charges can flow . are called conductors . but the flow of electric charges is called electricity . so we can also say that those substances through which electricity can flow are called conductors . all the metals like silver . copper and aluminium . etc . . are conductors see figure . the metal alloys such as nichrome . manganin and constantan which are used for making heating elements of electrical appliances are also conductors but their electrical conductivity is much less than that of pure metals . carbon . in the form of graphite . is also a conductor . the human body is a fairly good conductor .
 . nature of light before the beginning of the th century . light was considered to be a stream of particles that were emitted by a light source and stimulated the sense of sight upon entering the eye . the chief architect of this theory was isaac newton . with this theory . newton was able to provide a simple explanation of some known experimental facts concerning the nature of light . namely the laws of reflection and refraction . most scientists accepted newton s particle theory of light . this theory was called the corpuscular theory . another theory of light which treated light as a wave was put forward in . by a dutch physicist and astronomer . christian huygens .
there are certain disadvantages of the floating gas holder type biogas plant . it is more expensive as its gas holder drum is made of steel . . defects in the welding of gas holder and corrosion of steel can lead to leakage of biogas . . its maintenance cost is high as gas holder of this plant is to be painted frequently to save it from corrosion .
fig . the image of a candle when it lies between the focus and the pole of a concave mirror .
solar energy devices the sun is one of the major sources of renewable energy . solar energy consists of heat and light . scientists have made a number of devices which help in utilising the solar energy directly in our everyday life . the devices which work by using solar energy or sun s energy are solar cooker . solar water heater . and solar cell .
the construction of lenses of the optical instruments like cameras . microscopes and telescopes . etc . . depends on an accurate knowledge of the refractive index of glass used for making lenses . please note that if any two media are optically exactly the same . then no bending occurs when light passes from one medium to another . in other words . if the refractive indices of two media are equal . then there will be no bending of light rays when they pass from one medium to another . the ability of a substance to refract light is also expressed in terms of its optical density . the optical density of a substance or medium is the degree to which it retards or slows down the rays of light passing through it . a substance having higher refractive index is optically denser than another substance having lower refractive index . for example . the refractive index of one type of glass is . and that of water is . . since glass has a higher refractive index than water .
spherical mirror terms pole the central point on the surface of the mirror is called its pole . centre of curvature and radius of curvature the centre of the sphere of which the spherical mirror is a part is called the centre of curvature of the mirror . the radius of this sphere is called the radius of curvature of the mirror . it is clear from the parts a and b of figure . that the centre of curvature lies in front of the mirror in the case of a concave mirror and it lies behind the mirror in the case of a convex mirror . a line joining the centre of curvature to a point on the mirror is . from geometry . normal to the curved surface at that point . principal axis the line joining the pole and the centre of curvature is called the principal axis of the mirror .
magnetic field lines possess the following properties . magnetic field is a quantity that has both direction and magnitude . the direction of the magnetic field is taken to be the direction in which a north pole of the compass needle moves inside it . therefore . magnetic field lines travel from the north to the south pole of a magnet outside the magnet and from south to the north pole inside the magnet . . they are continuous closed curves . . they emerge out normally from the magnetised surfaces . . the tangent drawn at any point of the magnetic lines of force represents the direction of the magnetic field at that point . . no two field lines are found to cross each other . if they did . it would mean that at the point of intersection . the compass needle would point towards two directions . which is not possible . . the field lines of a uniform magnetic field are parallel to each other . . the more crowded the magnetic field lines . the stronger is the magnetic field .
the heating elements or heating coils of electrical heating appliances such as electric iron and toaster . etc . . are made of an alloy rather than a pure metal because i the resistivity of an alloy is much higher than that of pure metal . and ii an alloy does not undergo oxidation or burn easily even at high temperature . when it is red hot . for example . nichrome alloy is used for making the heating elements of electrical appliances such as electric iron . toaster . electric kettle . room heaters . water heaters geysers . and hair dryers . etc . . because i nichrome has very high resistivity due to which the
correction of astigmatism astigmatism can be corrected by a lens whose one surface is cylindrical . such a surface focusses rays in one plane but not in the perpendicular plane . by suitably choosing the radius of curvature and axis direction of the cylindrical surface . astigmatism can be corrected as shown in figure b .
in figure . an extended object ab an arrow pointing upwards is placed in front of a plane mirror mm . in order to locate the image of arrow ab in the plane mirror . we will first find out the positions of images of its top point a and bottom point b . this can be done as follows 
sini here sini u sinr u sinr the refractive index of the material of the prism is sin a m u sin sin this is called prism formula .
in order to cook food . the solar cooker is kept in sunshine . outside the house . the reflector of solar cooker is adjusted in such a way that it faces the sun . when the sun s rays fall on the reflector . the reflector sends them to the top of solar cooker box in the form of a strong beam of sunlight . the sun s heat rays pass through the glass sheet cover and get absorbed by the black inside surface of the cooker box . once the sun s heat rays enter the cooker box . then the glass sheet cover does not allow them to go back . in this way . more and more heat rays of the sun get trapped in the box due to which the temperature in the solar cooker box rises to about c to c in two to three hours . this heat cooks the food materials kept in the black containers . for example . the food materials like rice . pulses dal and vegetables can be cooked in a box type solar cooker .
the cause of hypermetropia is decrease in length of eye ball or increase in focal length of eye lens . but the cause of presbyopia is only increase in focal length of eye lens . the eye ball . in presbyopia . has normal length .
iron material metallic conductors silver copper aluminium tungsten platinum mercury semi conductors carbon graphite germanium silicon insulators glass hard rubber ebonite alloys constantan cu . ni magnanin cu . mn . ni nichrome ni . cr . mn 
working fresh tap water enters the storage tank through the pipe p and then flows into the box through the copper tube q . the water gets heated in the box when flowing through the copper tube and hot water leaves the box through copper tube r . hot water from the tank is collected through the pipes . hot water is collected from the top of the storage tank as hot water is lighter and remains in the upper part of the storage tank .
high dams constructed to generate hydroelectric power give rise to a number of environmental problems the dams also affect the flora and fauna of the region where they are built .
wood wood has been a major source of energy since man discovered fire . it is still used widely as a fuel for cooking and heating . in many indian homes . food is cooked on stoves that use biomass fuels such as wood . such a stove is called a chulha . a traditional chulha operates at a very low efficiency . hardly of the energy contained in the wood is utilized . also . it does not burn the wood completely . which causes a lot of smoke . indian scientists have designed several smokeless chulhas . these produce much less smoke . and the fuel is more efficiently utilized . wood can be more efficiently utilized by converting it into charcoal . charcoal is prepared by burning wood in an insufficient supply of oxygen . the process of burning wood in insufficient supply of oxygen is called destructive distillation of wood . wood is a mixture of carbon compounds like cellulose a carbohydrate . which decompose on heating . most of the products formed escape . and what is left behind is mainly carbon . which is a better fuel than wood . you can prepare charcoal by heating wood shavings in a closed container that has a hole for gases to escape .
this effect of magnetic field is used in building machines for accelerating charged particle . such machines are called charge accelerators . these machines are used to study structure of matter .
suppose we have a vertical current carrying wire or conductor placed in a magnetic field . let the direction of magnetic field is from west to east as shown by arrow ab in figure b . again suppose that the direction of current in the wire is vertically downwards as shown by arrow ac . now . we want to find out the direction of force which will be exerted on this current carrying wire . we will find out this direction by using fleming s left hand rule as follows we stretch our left hand as shown in figure a so that the forefinger . the centre finger and the thumb are perpendicular to one another . since the direction of magnetic field is from west to east . so we point our forefinger from west to east direction to represent the magnetic field . now . the current is flowing vertically downwards . so we point our centre finger vertically downwards to represent the direction of current . now let us look at the direction of force acting on the wire or direction of motion of wire . so . the force acting on the current carrying wire will be in the south direction as shown by the arrow ad in figure b . and the wire will move in the south direction .
for a series combination of resistors . the current is same through each resistor .
 a ray of light is incident at an angle of on one face of a rectangular glass slab of thickness . m and refractive index . . calculate the lateral shift produced . ans . here . i . u . . t . m sin i by snell s law . u sinr sini sin . i sinr u . . or r lateral shift produced . x sin i r . cost . cos sin . cos ici x sin m . x . . . m
types of electric fuse a porcelain fuse it consists of two parts i porcelain casing fixed to a wooden board and ii porcelain grip which fits into the porcelain casing . there are two terminals t . t . fixed to the porcelain casing . the live wire is connected to terminals tį and t . since there is no direct connection between tį and t . no current can flow from t to t unless connected by a wire .
so the screen must be placed at a distance of cm in front of the concave mirror .
we can extend this reasoning to all the points which make up part bo of the stick under water . thus . due to the refraction of light . a virtual image of the part bo of the stick is formed at bi . so . what we see under water is actually the virtual image bi of the part bo of the stick under water . since the part ab of the stick which is above water and the image bi under water are not in the same straight line . the stick ao appears to be bent at point b along bi . thus . though the actual stick is abo . it appears to be abi . please note that it is not the stick that is really bent . it is actually the light passing from water to air that is bent or refracted see figure .
rules for drawing images formed by spherical mirrors the position of the image formed by spherical mirrors can be found by considering any two of the following rays of light coming from a point on the object .
the fact that when a parallel beam of light rays falls on a concave mirror . the concave mirror concentrates all the light at its focus . explains the use of concave mirror as a doctor s head mirror . a concave mirror is used as a head mirror by the doctors to concentrate light coming from a lamp on to the body part of a patient like ear . nose . throat . etc . to be examined . this is done as follows a concave mirror is fixed to the front part of a doctor s head with the help of a strap as shown in figure a . when the beam of light coming from a lamp falls on the doctor s concave head mirror . the mirror focusses this light on to the body part of the patient . the body part gets illuminated brightly with this light due to which the doctor can look into the body part like ear . nose . throat . etc . very clearly .
 . focal plane when rays of light parallel to the principal axis are allowed to pass through a lens they converge or seem to come from the focus . if a parallel beam of light . not parallel to the principal axis . is incident on a lens then they do not meet or seem to come from a point on the principal axis . but instead they meet in a plane perpendicular to the principal axis . this plane is called the focal plane of the lens .
we conclude that when an object is placed beyond f in front of a convex lens . then the image formed is i between f and f on the other side of the lens . ii real and inverted . and
 i armature coil it consists of a large number of turns of a reciangular coil abcd made of copper wire wound over a soft iron laminated core . ii strong field magnets two concave poles ns of permanent magnets between which the armature coil is rotated . iii split rings or half rings the two ends of the coil are welded to two semicircular metallic rings r . and r . these rings are called the split rings or half rings . the function of the split rings is to ensure that the direction of current flowing through the load after each half rotation remains the same . iv brushes two carbon brushes b . and b make a contact with the split rings r . and r
hypermetropia long sightedness or far sightedness is corrected by using spectacles containing convex lenses . when a convex lens converging lens l of suitable power is placed in front of the hypermetropic eye as shown in figure c . then the diverging rays of light coming from the nearby object at cm are first converged by this convex lens . due to this . the convex lens forms a virtual image of the nearby object which is lying at the normal near point n at the near point n of the hypermetropic eye see figure c . since the rays of light now appear to be coming from this eye s near point n . they can be easily focused by the eye lens to form an image on the retina see figure c . please note that the convex lens used for correcting hypermetropia or long sightedness should be of such a focal length or power that it forms a virtual image of the object placed at the normal near point n of cm . at the near point n of the hypermetropic eye . m studygear
case ii when the refractive index of the medium is equal to that of the lens i . e . . um u f oo and p therefore . the focal length of the lens becomes infinity and the power becomes zero . consequently . the lens behaves like a glass slab plate . case iii when the refractive index of the medium is greater that of the lens . i . e . . um u f fo . therefore . the focal length of the lens decreases . consequently . the power of the lens increases . numerically . since um u u um is negative f is negative . the negative focal length indicates that the nature of the lens changes from converging to diverging and vice versa . fo
for example . a bulb rated v . w consumes joule of electrical energy per second when a potential difference of is applied across it . thus . the value of the voltage and power of an electrical appliance together is called its power rating .
from the above discussion we conclude that the colour of the scattered light depends on the size of the scattering particles in the atmosphere a the larger particles of dust and water droplets present in the atmosphere scatter the light as such due to which the scattered light also appears white . b the extremely minute particles such as the air molecules present in the atmosphere scatter mainly the blue light present in the white sunlight .
 . magnetic field pattern due to straight current carrying conductor straight current carrying wire the magnetic field lines around a straight conductor straight wire carrying current are concentric circles whose centres lie on the wire figure current . in figure . we have a straight vertical wire or conductor ab which upwards passes through a horizontal cardboard sheet c . the ends of the wire ab are connected to a battery through a switch . when current is passed through wire ab . it produces a magnetic field around it . this magnetic field has magnetic field lines around the wire ab which can be shown by sprinkling iron filings on the cardboard c . the iron filings get magnetised . and on tapping the cardboard sheet . the iron filings arrange themselves in circles magnetic around the wire showing that the magnetic field lines are circular in nature . a small plotting compass m placed on the cardboard indicates the direction anticlockwise of the magnetic field . when current in the wire flows in the upward direction as shown in figure . then the lines of magnetic field are in the figure . magnetic field anticlockwise direction . if the direction of current in the wire is reversed . the pattern due to a straight current carrying wire . direction of magnetic field lines also gets reversed . it has been shown by experiments that the magnitude of magnetic field produced by a straight current carrying wire at a given point is i directly proportional to the current passing in the wire . and ii inversely proportional to the distance of that point from the wire . so . greater the current in the wire . stronger will be the magnetic field produced . and greater the distance of a point from the current carrying wire . weaker will be the magnetic field produced at that point . in fact . as we move away from a current carrying straight wire . the concentric circles around it representing magnetic field lines . become larger and larger indicating the decreasing strength of the magnetic field . field lines
in the simplest case . the current i is directly proportional to the voltage v that is . i o v . thus . a v battery leads to twice as much current as a v battery . when each is connected to the same circuit . in electrical circuits . the resistance r is defined as the ratio of the voltage v applied across a piece of material to the current i through the material . or r v i .
scope of hydroelectricity hydroelectricity has huge potential worldwide . in india . it is estimated that . mw of hydroelectricity can be generated . out of this . by . india had an installed capacity of about . mw .
 . technical terms connected with lenses . centre of curvature a lens has two centres of curvature . these are the centres of the two spherical surfaces which combine to a form the lens . in figure . a and . . the points marked cį and c are the centres of curvature of the two surfaces which form the lens .
bar magnet coil
bright light dim light fig . the size of the pupil in bright light and dim light .
 a lens is a piece of transparent glass bound by two spherical surfaces there are two types of lenses convex lens and concave lens .
suppose we have a vertical current carrying wire or conductor placed in a magnetic field . let the direction of magnetic field be from west to east as shown by arrow ab in figure b . again suppose that the direction of current in the wire is vertically downwards as shown by arrow ac . now . we want to find out the direction of force which will be exerted on this current carrying wire . we will find out this direction by using fleming s left hand rule as follows we stretch our left hand as shown in figure a so that the forefinger . the centre finger and the thumb are perpendicular to one another . since the direction of magnetic
field magnet the magnetic field b is supplied by a permanent magnet in a small dynamo also called a magneto and by a electromagnet in case of a big commercial dynamo usually called a generator . the poles of the magnet are shown as n s in figure .
rule . a ray of light which is parallel to the principal axis of a convex lens . passes through its focus after refraction through the lens . this is shown in figure . here we have a convex lens l and its principal
how to distinguish between a plane mirror . a concave mirror and a convex mirror without touching them we can distinguish between these mirrors just by looking into them . that is . by bringing our face close to each mirror . turn by turn . all of them will produce an image of our face but of different types . a plane mirror will produce an image of the same size as our face and we will look our normal self . a concave mirror will produce a magnified image and our face will look much bigger like that of a giant . a convex mirror will produce a diminished image and our face will look much smaller like that of a small child . let us answer one question now .
advantages of hydroelectricity a the source of energy water is free and renewable . b harnessing the energy of flowing water is a pollution free process . with no smoke . chemicals . etc . . being produced . c the cost of electricity generation is low as compared to electricity generated from other types of power plants .
r o . . . i now . you know why we use thick wires for connecting different elements of a circuit . it ensures that their resistance is negligible . resistance depends on length take wires of the same material and the same thickness . but of different lengths . if the length of the first wire is . say . i . the other wires should be of length . . and so on . find the resistance v i of the first wire and then compare it with that of the others . you will find that when the length is doubled . the current is halved . in other words . the resistance is doubled . and . when the length becomes three times . the resistance also increases three times . thus . resistance is proportional to length . rocl . . . . ii resistance depends on temperature apart from these . resistance depends slightly on temperature . in general . resistance increases with increase in temperature .
the bending of light follows the following rules i in going from a rarer to a denser medium a ray of light passing obliquely from an optically rarer medium to an optically denser medium . bends towards the normal . in this case the angle of refraction is always less than the angle of incidence .
 i opposite charges or unlike charges attract each other . for example . a positive charge attracts a negative charge . ii similar charges or like charges repel each other . for example . a positive charge repels a positive charge and a negative charge repels a negative charge .
it was oersted who gave the first evidence of the connection between electricity and magnetism . this discovery led to some of the most fruitful achievements in the areas of industrial and technical development .
in physics . image is an optical appearance produced when light rays coming from an object are reflected from a mirror or refracted through a lens . this will become clear from the following example . when we look into a mirror . we see our face . what we see in the mirror is actually a reflection of our face and it is called image of our face . thus . when we look into a mirror . we see the image of our face in it . in this case . our face is the object and what we see in the mirror is the image . the image of our face appears to be situated behind the mirror . while watching a movie in the cinema hall . we see the images of actors and actresses on the cinema screen . please note that an image is formed when the light rays coming from an object meet or appear to meet at a point . after reflection from a mirror or refraction through a lens . the images are of two types real images and virtual images . these are discussed below .
fuse wire me sus b cartridge fuse c circuit symbol for a fuse a fuse wire in insulating holder fig . different types of fuses and its circuit symbol .
mass of nucleus m nuclear density p volume of nucleus tr nuclear density is independent of a and is order of the kg m .
when the sun is overhead in the noon . the light waves of shorter wavelengths of light blue and violet get scattered by the particles near the horizon but the longer wavelengths colours orange and red are scattered least . i . e . . they travel relatively undisturbed and reach the earth .
natural gas is . therefore . an environment friendly fuel as compared to other fossil fuels . . a great advantage of natural gas is that it can be supplied directly from the gas wells to the homes and factories for burning through a net work of underground pipelines . and this eliminates the need for additional storage and transport .
nuclear energy
dx gives us the reflected ray which appears to be coming from focus f of the convex mirror . we have now to draw a second ray of light from the point a going towards the centre of curvature c of the convex mirror . for this we join the point a with point c by a line which cuts the mirror at point e . the line from a to e is a solid line and it represents a real ray of light but the line from e to c is a dotted
rules for obtaining images formed by concave lenses we have already studied some rules for the formation of images by convex lenses . there are similar rules for constructing ray diagrams for obtaining images with concave lenses . these are given below .
 . defects of vision and their correction although the eye is one of the most remarkable organs in the body but sometimes . the eye may gradually lose its power of accommodation . it may develop several abnormalities . which can often be corrected with eyeglasses . contact lenses . or surgery .
fig . tyndall scattering .
consider a light ray travelling in air and incident at an angle on a flat . smooth surface mirror as shown in the figure . . let the ray of light be travelling from a and be incident on the mirror at . the ray ao is called the incident ray and the point is called the point of incidence . the incident ray gives the direction of the ray when it falls on the mirror . this ray is reflected by the mirror along ob . thus . ob is called the reflected ray . the reflected ray gives the direction of the ray after it bounces back from the mirror . the line no is perpendicular to the surface of the mirror and is ca od the normal at . the normal is usually represented by a dashed line . the incident ray ao makes an angle i with the normal . this is called the angle of incidence . the reflected ray bo makes an angle r with the normal . this angle is called the angle of reflection .
the surfaces of most of the objects are rough or uneven to some extent . so . most of the objects around us cause diffuse reflection of light and scatter the light falling on them in all directions . in fact . we can see these objects only because they scatter light rays falling on them in all directions . for example . a book lying on a table can be seen from all parts of the room due to diffuse reflection of light from its surface . the
u i rt vit heat produced by electric current
 . first law the incident ray . the refracted ray and the normal to the surface of separation of the two media at the point of incidence all lie in the same plane .
 . . limitations of solar cooker and solar water heater although a solar cooker has so many advantages . it also has certain disadvantages . . solar cooker cannot be used during night . . as the direction of sun changes with respect to the earth . the direction of reflector of solar cooker and water heater has to be changed continuously . . it cannot be used under poor weather conditions . for example . on a rainy day or when the sky is covered with clouds . . it cannot be used during winters .
 i use wires of high quality . proper amperage and good insulating material . ii cover all naked wires and joints with insulating tape . iii all connections at plugs . switches . sockets must be tight . iv replace any defective plugs . switches and sockets . v never touch any part of the circuit without putting on rubber shoes or rubber gloves . vi use fuse nowadays mcb of proper rating and material . vii all electrical appliances must be properly earthed . viii connect switches and fuse to live wires . ix put out the main switch in case of short circuiting and fire . x do not use water as fire extinguishers in case of fire due to electricity .
principal axis radius of curvature c optical centre radius of curvature principal axis c optical centre fig . the optical centre and the principal axis of a a convex lens b concave lens .
it may be recalled that the fleming s left hand rule is applied when we are given i the direction of the magnetic field and ii the direction of flow of current and we are to find the direction of force on the conductor i . e . . the direction of motion of the conductor .
butane in liquid form is called lpg mercaptan . a strong smelling substance . is added to lpg to detect its leakage . fig . lpg natural gas is obtained from oil fields .
good sources of energy what is a good source of energy that depends on many things such as the purpose for which it is needed . available resources . etc . what is good for a village might not be suitable for a factory . for choosing a source of energy for a particular purpose . we evaluate the following characteristics . energy output per unit volume the energy output per unit volume or mass of a good source of energy should be high . the gas in a kg lpg cylinder can be used by a family of average size to cook food for about a month . to cook the same amount of food using wood . you would need a roomful of wood . clearly . the energy output per unit volume of lpg . which takes a small space in the kitchen . is much higher than that of wood . steady availability the energy source should be available readily and for a long time . for example . coal and petroleum have been readily available for a long time . although the sun is a good source of energy . it is available only during the day . similarly . wind energy is reliable only in those places where there is always a wind . safe and easy to use for widespread use . the source of energy has to be safe and easy to use . a fuel that produces a lot of smoke is not a good source of energy . since it is not safe for people s health . a nuclear power plant is not easy to build and operate . this limits the use of nuclear fuels like uranium . easy to store and transport most common sources of energy such as coal . petrol and lpg need to be transported to users from their points of production . they also need to be stored before use . we should be able to transport and store such sources of energy safely and economically . economical the source of energy has to be economical . hydrogen is an excellent fuel . but . it is not widely used as it is costly to produce . store and transport it .
brushes or sliding contacts by and b are flexible metal plates or carbon rods . these are called brushes or sliding contacts . by is in constant touch with r and b is in constant touch with r . it is with the help of these brushes that the induced current is passed on from the armature and the rings to the external circuit containing a resistance . r and a galvanometer . g . brushes are stationary i . e . . these do not rotate with the rotation of the armature . working the working of a ac generator is clear from figures a and b . as armature is rotated about an axis . the magnetic flux linked with the armature changes . therefore . an induced current is produced in the armature .
conductor of electricity . copper and aluminium metals are also good conductors . electric wires are made of copper or aluminium because they have very low electrical resistance see figure . those substances which have comparatively high electrical resistance . are called resistors . the alloys like nichrome . manganin and constantan or eureka . all have quite high resistances . so they are called resistors . resistors are used to make those electrical devices where high resistance is required see figure . a resistor reduces the current in a circuit . those substances which have infinitely high electrical resistance are called insulators . an insulator does not allow electricity to flow through it . rubber is an excellent insulator . electricians wear rubber handgloves while working with electricity because rubber is an insulator and protects them from electric shocks see figure . wood is also a good insulator . we are now in a position to answer the
consider a rectangular glass slab pqrs shown in figure . now . here we have two different media . one is air and the other is glass media is the plural of medium . please note that glass is optically denser medium as compared to air we will give the meaning of optically denser medium after a while . now . a ray of light ao travelling in air is incident or falls obliquely on the glass slab at point o see figure . since the glass slab is transparent . most of the incident light passes into the glass slab . since glass is an optically denser medium than air . so when the ray of light ao passes from air into glass . its direction changes . it goes along the line ob inside the glass slab and we say that the light ray has been refracted or bent . this is because ao and ob are not in the same straight line . please note that the refraction or bending of light takes place at the boundary between the two media . for example . in figure . the refraction of light or bending of light takes place at point o at the boundary of the two media air and glass . we will now define the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction .
working coal or oil is burnt in a furnace to produce heat energy . this heat energy is used to boil water in a reservoir . the steam produced in the water reservoir is allowed to fall on a turbine under high pressure . the steam falling on the turbine through an axle rotates the turbine with high speed and produces electricity . in fact . the mechanical energy kinetic energy of rotation of the turbine is converted into electrical energy . the electricity . so produced is transmitted to distant places through transmission wires . thermal power plants are usually set up near coal fields or oil fields . so that there will be no problem in transporting the fuel .
ohm s law the current flowing through a given conductor is directly proportional to the potential difference across its ends provided its temperature and the other physical conditions of the conductor remains the same . this is known as ohm s law .
energy from flowing water flowing water has kinetic energy . which can be used to do useful work . this principle is used to generate hydroelectricity . water is collected behind dams and is allowed to fall down on the blades of turbines connected to generators . advantages free and renewable source of energy nonpolluting cost of electricity generation is lower than that from thermal and
 c moderator the reaction is started up by a neutron emitting source . the reactor core also contains a moderator . which acts to slow down the speed of neutrons so that they can be captured more readily by the fuel and the fission process can take place more efficiently . heavy water do and graphite act as good moderators . the moderator is arranged so that it surrounds the fuel rod to give more efficient action .
defects of vision near sightedness is a defect of vision due to which a person is not able to see distant objects clearly . it is also called short sightedness or myopia .
moving air is called wind . uneven heating of the earth s surface causes the winds to blow .
based on renewable sources are being tried by many countries including india . these are solar . wind . sea . geothermal and biomass . of all these . solar energy can be a major source of power . its potential is about billion mw which is about . times the world s demand .
using energy judiciously the total coal reserves in our country are estimated to be about billion tonnes . but we are consuming it at a rate of million tonnes per year . at this rate the resource that nature produced over millions of years will be consumed in just a few hundred years the situation is more alarming in the case of oil petroleum reserves . the known oil reserves of our country are about million tonnes only . of which we are consuming million tonnes per year . so . the oil reserves will last for a few decades only . the demand for energy is increasing every day . the increasing demand cannot be met for a long time unless new resources are harnessed . since conventional . nonrenewable energy sources are depleting very fast . this situation is called energy crisis . increased use of fossil fuels is also causing environmental problems such as air pollution which leads to health problems . acid rain and global warming . to overcome the energy crisis and to save the environment . we have to use energy judiciously . this means using less of nonrenewable and more of renewable energy sources . not wasting energy and saving energy wherever possible .
principle it works on the principle that when a coil rotates in a uniform magnetic field . a current is induced in the coil . the direction of induced current is determined by fleming s right hand rule .
hydrogen bomb fusion bomb principle it works on principle of nuclear fusion which is an uncontrolled nuclear reaction . construction it consists of an arrangement for nuclear fission at the centre of a mixture of deuterium h and lithium liº . working the nuclear fission provides heat and neutrons . fission in the centre heat neutrons neutrons are used in converting lithium into tritium h and heat is liberated . ont l h heat energy tritium heat liberated starts fusion between h and hº and liberates large amount of energy h h he on energy deuterium hº hº he on energy h² h he energy tritium has to be produced within the hydrogen bomb because it is not stable . enormousity of the energy produced in formation of a single helium nucleus four nucleons h take part and . mev of energy is produced . neutron . puu hence . energy released per nucleon . mev it is about times more than in fission . this fact makes hydrogen bomb times more dangerous than atom bomb which is a fission bomb .
heating effect of when an electric current is passed through a high resistance wire . like nichrome wire . the resistance wire becomes very hot and produces heat . this is called the heating effect of current . the heating effect of current is obtained by the transformation of electrical energy into heat energy . just as mechanical energy used to overcome friction is converted into heat . in the same way . electrical energy is converted into heat energy when an electric current flows through a resistance wire . thus . the role of resistance in electrical circuits is similar to the role of friction in mechanics . we will now derive a formula for calculating the heat produced when an electric current flows through a resistance wire . since a conductor . say a resistance wire . offers resistance to the flow of current . so work must be done by the current int continuously to keep itself flowing . we will calculate the work
 . safety measures in using electricity it goes beyond doubt that electricity plays a very important role in our lives . it is one of the most important and convenient source of energy at homes and industries . however . we daily come across reports regarding hazards of electricity . use of electricity can prove to be very dangerous if certain precautions and safety measures are not observed in the design of electrical devices and in handling them . before we discuss some safety devices . we will list out the precautions that must be observed while using electricity .
at c at c real . same size . inverted between c and f w jwil between c and real . enlarged . inverted infinity at f at infinity real . infinitely large . inverted feb bad between the pole p behind the mirror virtual . enlarged . erect and focus f ċ a
an electric appliance consumes the specified power w only if it runs at the specified voltage . if the applied voltage is greater than the specified voltage of the appliance . the appliance will get damaged . similarly . if the appliance is made to run at a lower voltage . its power consumption decreases . the power rating of an electrical device is the value of electrical power consumed by the device under standard conditions .
it consists of a box b . the outer side of which is made of metal sheet . wood or plastic sheet . the inner side of this box is made of a metal sheet which is painted black . we can also use metals which are black in colour . the box is covered with a thick removable glass sheet g a plane mirror acting as a wida . sun rays glass sheet cover reflector plane mirror inner metal box painted black from inside container with food to be cooked painted black . from outside outer wooden box having thermocol lining inside fig . a solar cooker using a plane mirror as a reflector .
do developing countries such as dominican republic . sri lanka and zimbabwe are you leading users of solar cell panels . know
how fossil fuels were formed the plants and animals which died millions of years ago . were gradually buried deep in the earth and got covered with sediments like mud and sand . away from the reach of oxygen of air . in the absence of oxygen . the chemical effects of pressure . heat and bacteria . converted the buried remains of plants and animals into fossil fuels like coal . petroleum and natural gas . it should be noted that the buried remains of large plants were converted into coal whereas those of small plants and animals were converted into petroleum and natural gas .
solar cells a device which converts solar energy directly into electricity is called a solar cell . solar cells are made from semiconductors like silicon . in a solar panel . a large number of solar cells are connected to get a large potential difference and current . uses in calculators . watches . artificial satellites . and in providing electricity in remote areas to run such things as pumps . telephones . lights . etc . advantages suitable for remote areas with no electricity . requires little maintenance . low operating cost . pollution free operation limitations expensive . provides only dc . requires large area for generating even modest amount of power . works only in daytime . reduced efficiency in winters and on cloudy days
natural gas is formed under the earth due to decomposition of plants and animals by anaerobic bacteria under suitable condition of temperature and pressure . natural gas was formed by a process similar to that by which petroleum was formed . natural gas was formed from the remains of marine organisms plants and animals as well as the remains of land plants that got buried under water . in the absence of oxygen underwater . they were decomposed by anaerobic bacteria . methane was formed in the process . when the organic material got buried under layers of sediments . heat and pressure produced more methane as well as oil . this gas moved up through the pores in the rocks and got trapped in pockets of nonporous rock . at some places . however . natural gas manages to find its way to the surface . natural gas consists of methane . ethane and propane . however . the main component of natural gas is methane . gas fields have been found in tripura . jaisalmer . offshore area of bombay and in krishna godavari delta .
 vf v f ou f f u if the magnification of a lens is negative then the image formed is inverted and real . if the magnification of a lens is positive . then the image formed is erect and virtual .
wind energy wind is caused by the uneven heating of the earth s surface by the sun . to generate electricity on a commercial basis . wind electric generators are set up in large wind farms . advantages free source of energy nonpolluting factories can use small wind electric plants limitations requires regular wind is not a dependable source . wind farms are costly
the most important development concerning the theory of light was the work of maxwell . who in predicted that light . was a form of a high frequency electromagnetic wave . his theory predicted that these waves should have a speed of x m sl . within experimental error this is equal to the speed of light . hertz provided experimental confirmation of maxwell s theory in by producing and detecting electromagnetic waves . furthermore . hertz and other investigators showed that these waves exhibited reflection . refraction and all other properties of waves .
 fig . . this spent slurry is used as manure because it contains compounds rich in nitrogen and phosphorus .
when the north pole of the magnet is brought towards the coil . a current flows in the coil as shown in figure b and the galvanometer shows deflection towards the right .
the first prism splits white light into its coloured components . when these separated components pass through the second prism . they recombine to form white light . the second prism was kept inverted with respect to the first to recombine the components of white light .
 list some disadvantages of tidal energy .
ac generator suppose we remove the commutator from a dc generator . and make an arrangement so that the arm ab of the coil is always in electrical contact with the terminal p . and the arm cd is in contact with the terminal q . then with each half rotation . as the direction of the current in the coil changes . the direction of the current in the bulb connected across the terminals of the generator also changes . an electric current that reverses its direction periodically is called an alternating current ac . most power generating stations have ac generators . an ac generator is also called an alternator . it is similar in construction to a dc generator . with one major difference the commutator is replaced by slip rings .
material table . resistivity of materials at c resistivity in material resistivity in ω m ω m conductors semiconductors silver . x germanium . copper . x silicon aluminium . x insulators tungsten . x paper nickel . x diamond iron . x mica chromium . x rubber mercury . x ebonite manganese . x teflon alloys wood x glass manganin x quartz . x cu . mn . ni constantan cu . ni nichrome x ni . cr . mn . fe 
images formed by a thin lens a convex lens can form real as well as virtual image . if the image is real . it is inverted . if the image is virtual . it is erect . the size of the image is smaller for objects beyond f . equal in size for objects at f . and larger in size for objects between f and the lens . a concave lens always forms a virtual . erect and smaller image .
in power stations . huge a . c . generators or alternators are used to generate current for dho the a . c . mains which is supplied to homes . transport and industry . the power house a . c . generators have a fixed set of coils arranged around a rotating electromagnet see figure . thus . in large power house generators . the coils are stationary and the electromagnet rotates . the big coils of a power house generator are kept stationary because they are very heavy and hence difficult to rotate . the electromagnet can . however . be rotated more easily . the shaft of electromagnet of a generator is connected to a turbine . when the turbine is turned by fast flowing water or pressure of steam . then the electromagnet turns inside the coils and generator produces electricity . 
energy meter or kwh meter after the company fuse . the cable is connected to the energy meter which records the electricity consumption of the house in kilowatt hour kwh . the earth wire from the meter is locally earthed in the compound of the house .
 . tidal energy the rise of sea water due to gravitational pull of the moon is called high tide whereas the fall of sea water is called low tide . the tidal waves in the sea build up and recede rise and fall twice a day . the enormous movement of water between the high tides and low tides provides a very large source of energy in the coastal areas of the world . the tidal energy can be harnessed by constructing a tidal barrage or tidal dam across a narrow opening to the sea see figure .
fossil fuels the combustible substances formed from the dead remains of the animals and plants which were buried deep under the surface of the earth for over millions of years are called fossil energy sources or fossil fuels . at present . a major part of our energy requirement is being supplied by fossil fuels . example of fossil fuels coal . petroleum and natural gas .
force on a current carrying wire by a magnetic field when a current carrying wire is placed in a magnetic field . a force acts on the wire . the direction of the force depends on the direction of the magnetic field as well as the direction of the current . the direction of the force is given by fleming s left hand rule if the forefinger . second finger and thumb of the left hand are stretched at right angles to each other . with the forefinger in the direction of the field and the second finger in the direction of the current then the thumb indicates the direction of the force .
 i the magnetic field lines near the coil are nearly circular and concentric . this is due to the reason that the segments of the coil in contact with the board at the points a and b are almost like straight conductors . the direction of the field lines can also be found by applying right hand thumb rule .
 . we now move the wire ab downwards rapidly between the poles of the horseshoe magnet see figure b . when the wire is moved down . the galvanometer pointer again shows a deflection . but in the opposite direction to the left side see figure . this means that when the wire is moved down in the magnetic field . even then an electric current is produced in it . but when the direction of movement of wire is reversed from up to down . then the direction of current produced in the wire is also reversed .
 b the solar cells in a solar panel are connected using silver . to keep the resistance as low as possible . this also increases the cost . c solar cells provide direct current dc . while most household appliances work on ac . special devices inverters are needed to convert the dc to ac . d since the power output of solar cells is low . a large number of solar panels . spread over a large area . are required . even to meet the normal electrical power requirement of a household . e like all solar devices . solar cells work only during the day . and their effectiveness is reduced in winters and on cloudy days . for the power requirement at night . storage batteries are charged by solar cells during the day . the batteries further add to the cost .
please note that whatever be the position of object in front of a convex mirror . the image formed by a convex mirror is always behind the mirror . it is virtual . erect and smaller than the object or diminished . when the distance of the object is changed from convex mirror . then only the position and size of the image changes . there are two main positions of an object in the case of a convex mirror from the point of view of position and size of image . the object can be i anywhere between pole p and infinity . and ii at infinity . we will discuss both these cases one by one . let us first describe the formation of image by a convex mirror when the object is placed between pole p of the mirror and infinity .
if we move the object more and more away from the pole of the convex mirror . the image becomes smaller and smaller in size and moves away from the mirror towards its focus but it remains virtual and erect for all the positions of the object . and when the object is at infinity . the image is formed at the focus . this is discussed below .
 . second law of reflection . according to the second law of reflection of light the angle of reflection is always equal to the angle of incidence . we can also state the second law of reflection of light as follows by writing the angle of incidence first the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection . if the angle of incidence is i and the angle of reflection is r . then according to the second law of reflection zi zr for example . if we measure the angle of reflection nob in figure . we will find that it is exactly equal to the angle of incidence aon . the second law of reflection of light means that if the angle of incidence is º . then the angle of
classification of sources of energy we can classify energy sources in different ways . one classification is based on the reserves supply of an energy source . another is based on how long we have been using it . 
illustrations the speed of light in air is m s and the speed of light in water is . m s . find the refractive index of water . ans . given . c x m s . v . x m s using . n . we have n xm s . xm . . thus . refractive index of water . 
hence . in order to make use of solar energy we have to first collect and concentrate it . we have now developed technology that enables us to harness solar energy in a more efficient and convenient manner . the devices commonly used for harnessing solar energy are solar cookers . solar water heaters . solar water pumps and photovoltaic cells or solar cells . these devices are called solar energy devices .
do you know the earth s magnetic field is not due to a huge bar magnet inside it . the earth s core is hot and molten . perhaps convective currents in this core are responsible for the earth s magnetic field .
physics experiments over the past hundred years or so have demonstrated that light has a dual nature double nature light exhibits the properties of both waves and particles depending on the situation it is in . the modern theory of light called quantum theory of light combines both the wave and particle models of light .
alternating current suppose you connect a bulb to an ac source such as the ac supply of your house figure . a . the potential difference va vb across the bulb keeps changing with time . when the current
 . the magnetic field lines come closer to one another near the poles of a magnet but they are widely separated at other places . a north magnetic pole experiences a stronger force when it approaches one of the poles of the magnet . this means that the magnetic field is stronger near the poles . from this we conclude that where magnetic field lines are closer together . it indicates a stronger magnetic field . on the other hand . when magnetic field lines are widely separated . then it indicates a weak magnetic field .
case e needs special attention . the object ab is placed at the focus . the point a is on the focus . the ray bd is parallel to the principal axis . it passes through the point a after reflection . the ray be passes through c and retraces its path . the reflected rays da and eb turn out to be parallel . we can say that they intersect at infinity to form a real image of b below the principal axis . in this sense . the image of ab can be considered real and inverted . however . when the reflected rays fall on the eye . they appear to come from a point behind the mirror . above the principal axis . in this sense . the image may be considered virtual and erect . in case f . rays coming from b diverge after reflection . if the reflected rays are produced backwards . they meet at b . to the eye . the reflected rays appear to come from b . thus b is the image of b . and a b is the image of ab . it is a virtual image because the rays do not actually intersect . the size of the image is larger than that of the object . and the image is erect .
disadvantages of hydroelectricity a dams built for large hydroelectric plants submerge a large area of land under water . this affects the plants and animals of the region . people of the area lose their lands . apart from this . blocking or changing the course of a river affects fish and other organisms of the river . b large hydroelectric power plants are expensive to build . c not all rivers and not all areas are suitable for hydroelectric power generation .
reflection of light from plane surfaces plane mirror when a ray of light falls on a plane mirror or any other plane surface . it is reflected according to some laws . called the laws of reflection of light . in order to understand the laws of reflection of light . we should first know the meaning of the terms incident ray . point of incidence . reflected ray . normal at the point of incidence . angle of incidence . and angle of reflection . so . we will discuss these terms first .
image b f . a fig . image formation by a convex lens when the object is placed between fy and optical centre .
electromagnet . they are temporary magnets and produce magnetic field only for the time current passes through them . . the strength of the magnetic field can be made large by increasing the number of turns and increasing the current through it . . during its operation its strength can be varied . . its polarity can be reversed during its operation . . it has a large number of applications
nuclear pollution can occur by any one of these . processing of nuclear fuel . . leakage from a nuclear reactor . . disposal of nuclear waste
focal plane a vertical plane perpendicular to the principal axis . passing through the principal focus of the lens is called a focal plane . as shown in figure c and d . the plane passing through the first principal focus is called first focal plane and that passing through the second principal focus is called second focal plane .
the production of electric current by moving a magnet inside a fixed coil of wire is also a case of electromagnetic induction . the concept of a fixed coil and a rotating magnet is used to produce electricity on large scale in big generators of power houses . please note that the condition necessary for the production of electric current by electromagnetic induction is that there must be a relative motion between the coil of wire and a magnet . out of the coil of wire and a magnet . one can remain fixed but the other has to rotate or move . after performing a large number of experiments . faraday and henry made the following observations about electromagnetic induction . a current is induced in a coil when it is moved or rotated relative to a fixed magnet . . a current is also induced in a fixed coil when a magnet is moved or rotated relative to the fixed
domestic electric circuits we use different electrical appliances in our houses which work on the electricity supplied from a power distribution station . electricity generated at a power plant is distributed to consumers from distribution stations . in most places in india . the household power supply is ac . the supply is at v . hz . let us see what this means .
near sightedness can be corrected with a diverging or concave lens . as in fig . . in this case . the rays of light are first diverged by the concave lens and then converged by the eye lens . due to this combined action the image is formed on the retina . let x distance of far point of myopic eye . f focal length of concave lens to be used . as the object to be seen is at infinity and its image is to be formed at the far point . therefore . u o and v x . from lens formula vuf off xa orf x . hence . for a myopic eye . focal length of concave lens used for correcting the myopic eye is equal to distance of far point of the myopic eye .
 sign . a concave lens has a negative focal length . so the power of a concave lens is negative and written with a minus sign . since a convex lens is also known as a converging lens and a concave lens is also known as a diverging lens . we can also say that the power of a converging lens is positive whereas the power of a diverging lens is negative . when an optician . after testing the eyes of a person . prescribes the corrective lenses of say . . d and . d for the left eye and right eye . respectively . he actually refers to the power of convex lenses required for making eye glasses or spectacles to make him see clearly .
we can explain the case of no refraction or no bending of light on going perpendicularly from air to glass as follows when a beam of light consisting of light waves and travelling in air falls perpendicularly at right angles to the surface of glass slab . then all the parts of light waves reach the glass slab at the same time . enter the glass slab at the same time and hence get slowed down at the same time see figure . due to this no change in direction of light takes place . in other words . no refraction of light no bending of light takes place . similarly . all the parts of the light waves of the beam of light travelling in glass slab come out of the glass slab into air at the same time and hence speed up at the same time . due to this . no bending of light occurs when the light waves go out from glass slab into air see figure .
causes the two possible causes of this defect are decrease in length of the eye ball . as if distance of retina from the eye lens has decreased . increase in focal length of the eye lens . when the eye is fully relaxed .
distribution board power lines coming from the main switch are taken to the distribution board . it is from the distribution board that the wires go to the different parts of the house through fuses in the board .
 . . dispersion of light in nature a rainbow is a coloured arc seen in the sky during or after a rainfall . a rainbow is formed due to a combination of refraction . dispersion and total internal reflection . the following conditions must be satisfied for viewing a rainbow i there is a bright sunshine after a rainfall and the sky is almost clear . ii the sun is at the back of the observer .
sometimes two holes are drilled into the earth in the region of hot rocks and two pipes are put into them . cold water is pumped in through one of the pipes . this cold water is turned into steam by the hot rocks . the steam thus formed comes out through the other pipe and used to generate electricity .
working of a dc generator to generate electricity . the shaft . on which the coil is mounted . needs to be rotated . in gensets . this is done by a small diesel engine . in the case of the dynamo of a bicycle . the rotating wheel rotates the shaft . in power stations . steam . water or wind falling on the blades of a turbine rotates the generator s shaft . as the coil rotates in the magnetic field . electricity is generated . when an electrical device is connected across the terminals of the generator . the circuit is completed and a current flows through the coil . if the terminals are left open . there is no current . but a potential difference appears between them . in figure . a . the brushes b and b are in contact with the halves cį and c of the commutator respectively . b . is connected to the terminal p . and b is connected to the terminal q . in the situation shown in figure . a . the arm ab of the coil is moving downwards . while the arm dc is moving upwards . applying fleming s left hand rule . we find that the current in the coil flows along dcba . thus . the current flows through the bulb from p to q . after half a rotation . the brushes with which the two halves of the commutator were in contact get interchanged figure . b . now . the arm ab is moving upwards and the arm dc is moving downwards . this causes the current to flow along abcd . the current through the bulb . however . remains from p to q . this means that the terminal p always remains at a higher potential than q . since a current flows from a higher to a lower potential . note that although the direction of the current in the arms of the coil changes with each half rotation . the commutator and brush arrangement ensures that the current in the external circuit remains in the same direction . as long as the coil is rotating . a direct current flows through the device connected to the terminals of the generator .
sun is the ultimate source of fossil fuels we have just seen that fossil fuels have been produced from the remains of plants and animals that were buried in the earth long ago . actually . it was the sunlight of long ago that made plants grow . which were then converted into fossil fuels . this can be explained as follows the green plants need sunlight energy to grow . they get this energy from sunlight . and store it in the form of carbon compounds . so . every leaf and every bit of wood in the plant was made with the energy of sunlight . the animals also eat plants . so the animal material is also a store house of sun s energy . these plants and animals which were originally made by using sun s energy have been converted into fossil fuels like coal . petroleum and natural gas . thus . fossil fuels are energy rich compounds of carbon which were originally made by the plants with the help of sun s energy solar energy . without sunlight . there could have been no coal . petroleum . natural gas . wood or any other fuel in this world . today when we burn coal . petroleum or natural gas . we are actually making use of the sunlight energy that was stored by the plants millions of years ago . we will now discuss the three fossil fuels . coal . petroleum and natural gas . one by one . let us start with coal .
it must be heated to a certain minimum temperature . the minimum temperature to which a fuel must be heated so that it may catch fire and start burning . is known as its ignition temperature . when we apply a burning matchstick or a lighter spark to the burner of a gas stove . we actually supply a little heat to cooking gas coming out of gas burner so that it gets heated to its ignition temperature and start burning . no fuel can burn unless it is heated to its ignition temperature .
thumb points vertically downwards to represent the direction of motion . then we will find that our centre finger points towards north figure b and this gives the direction of induced current . thus . the induced current in this case will be towards north as represented by arrow ad in figure a . please note that fleming s right hand rule is also called dynamo rule .
 . linear magnification it is defined as the ratio of the height of the image h to the height of the object h . mathematically . we have height of the image . h linear magnification m height of the object h m h v h u m image distance i . e . . object distance the negative sign is used to tell whether the image is erect or inverted . in terms off . we have . m f v . f ff u if m is positive . the image is erect w . r . t . the object and if m is negative . the image is inverted w . r . t . the object .
suppose the direction of magnetic field is directed from east to west as shown by arrow ab in figure a . and the direction of motion of conductor is vertically downwards . as shown by the arrow ac in figure a . then to find out the direction of induced current in the conductor . we hold the thumb . the forefinger and centre finger of our right hand mutually at right angles to one another . we adjust the right hand in such a way that the forefinger points from east to west to represent the magnetic field . and the
 or concentrates a lot of sun s rays to a small point on paper . the heat energy of these concentrated sun rays burns the paper . please note that the image of the sun formed by the concave mirror is real because it can be received on screen such as a sheet of paper .
ray the straight line path along which the light travels in a homogeneous medium is called a ray . it is represented by an arrow head on a straight line . the arrow head represents the direction of propagation of light . ray
d coal petroleum and natural gas hydro nuclear o wind fig . major sources of energy in india .
figure . a parallel beam of light rays is incident on a convex mirror mm . each ray of light is reflected by the convex mirror . and the reflected rays diverge spread out from the mirror surface . let us produce all the reflected rays backwards as shown by dotted lines so that they appear to meet at a point f behind the convex mirror . now . to a person looking into the mirror from the left side . all the reflected rays appear to be coming or diverging from the same point f behind the convex mirror . this point f is the principal focus of the convex mirror . it should be noted that the reflected rays do not actually pass through the focus f of a convex mirror . therefore . a convex mirror has virtual focus . another point to be noted is that the focus of a convex mirror is situated behind the mirror . the focal length of a convex mirror is the distance
fig . a ray of light is represented with the help of a line on which the arrow shows the direction of its propagation . a converging b diverging ગકતમતન સમજનતરતરનનબતમમતનનનન historie c parallel fig . different kinds of pencil of light . when the rays of light . after reflection from a mirror . actually meet at a point . then the image formed by these rays is said to be real . real images can be obtained on a screen .
rotation bv byss sega led for gas h ong b eto band o brush brush commutator fig . schematic diagram of a dc generator .
of suitable focal length . the convex lens of spectacles reduces the divergence of rays of light entering the eye . hence this lens makes the rays of light appear to come from the near point of the defective eye as shown in figure c .
activity let us trace a ray of light through a prism . fix a sheet of white paper on a board . place the prism on it and draw its outline abc . draw a line pq that meets ac at q . at an angle of about to ac . fix two pins k and l vertically on this line . about cm apart . now look at the image of the pins from the side bc of the prism . fix a pin m such that it appears to be in a straight line with the images of k and l . when in a straight line . the other pins will disappear behind m . fix another pin n at least cm from m such that all four pins fig . . appear to be in a straight line . remove the prism and the pins . join by a straight line the points where the pins m and n were inserted . this line . sr . meets bc at r . join q and r by a straight line . the lines pq . qr and rs represent the directions of the incident ray . the ray within the prism and the emergent ray respectively . draw perpendiculars to ac and bc at q and r respectively . measure the angles i . . i . and r . also . measure the angle of deviation . i . e . . the angle between pq and rs . р
energy from the sea or ocean tidal energy definition due to attraction of moon on sea water . water surface rises and falls and waves are formed . these waves are called tidal waves .
the split ring in a dc motor ensures that the current is always in the same direction so that the coil of the motor rotates continuously . a the speed of the motor depends upon a the strength of the magnetic field . the current in the coil . and c the number of turns in the armature coil .
charge on one electron . electrons have a charge coulomb electron has a charge c . c . x charge on one electron . c .
at time of high tide water pressure reservoir high tide generator turbine a at high tide water flows from sea into the bay or reservoir and turns the turbines . at time of low tide water pressure bay bosince il low tide generator turbine b at low tide water flows from bay or reservoir into the sea and turns the turbines . fig . working of a tidal dam to generate electricity .
 . experimental verification of ohm s law to verify ohm s law the circuit shown in figure . is used . the circuit shows a battery which is used for sending a current through the circuit . a rheostat a variable resistance is used in series to control the current in the circuit . the ammeter a which is connected in series measures the current in the circuit and the voltmeter v connected in parallel to the resistor measures the potential difference across the resistor r . the key k in the circuit is used for making or breaking the circuit .
properties of magnet poles of magnet the ends of a magnet where the magnetic effect is maximum are called the poles of a magnet . a magnet has two poles . north pole and south pole .
set up the apparatus as shown in figure . s is a strong source of white light . we will consider this source of light to be the sun . the source of light s is placed at the focus of a convex lens converging lens l so as to produce a parallel beam of light rays . a transparent glass tank t is filled with about litres of clear water . a cardboard disc d having a circular hole c at its centre is kept on the other side of the water tank . another convex lens l is kept behind the cardboard disc to focus the light rays coming from the glass tank and passing through the circular hole of cardboard disc to form an image on the screen r . we will now describe how the experiment is actually performed .
two rays useful for ray tracing to find the point of intersection of the reflected rays . you need any two rays . we choose two incident rays that get reflected along known paths . the first can be the ray that is incident parallel to the principal axis . after reflection . it passes through the focus . which is a known point . the other ray can be the one that is incident perpendicular to the mirror s surface . since its angle of incidence is zero . the angle of reflection is also zero . i . e . . the ray turns right back . or retraces its path . being perpendicular to the spherical surface . the ray or its projection backwards passes through the centre of curvature . another known point .
cattle dung cattle dung has been traditionally used as a fuel in india . the dung is shaped into flat cakes . dried and used as fuel for cooking . burning cattle dung cake produces some heat and a lot of smoke . scientists have now found a better way of using cattle dung to produce biogas . which is an excellent fuel . this gas is popularly called gobar gas .
nature of light light travels from the source along a straight line . called the ray . thus . ray nature has been used to explain the phenomena of reflection and refraction which is our everyday experience .
working to generate electricity . the shaft on which the coil is mounted is rotated . fig . a shows ab arm is moving down . and cd arm is moving up and the current flows along dcba in accordance with fleming s right hand rule . fig . b shows the situation after half a rotation arm ab is moving up and arm cd is moving down . this causes the current to flow along abcd in accordance with fleming s right hand rule . thus . the direction of the current in the arms of the coil changes with each half rotation and so does the current through the circuit . in other words . alternating current flows through the circuit .
generating electricity from wind a windmill can be designed to rotate the shaft of a generator . such a windmill is usually called a wind turbine . a specially designed wind turbine is connected to the shaft of small generator . the electricity produced by such an arrangement is not sufficient even for a small town . to be commercially useful . a number of wind electric generators are set up in a large area . called a wind farm . the combined electrical outputs of all the generators are then used to supply power .
 iv for the ray incident at any angle at the pole . the reflected ray follows the laws of reflection .
do you know sky appears greyish over cities having industrial units . the smoke and dust particles in the atmosphere over such cities scatter red . orange and yellow colours more than other colours of small wavelength . hence . the sky appears greyish .
 . optically rarer and optically denser medium the different media through which light travels have different optical densities . when two media are compared . an optically denser medium is one in which the velocity of light is less and . an optically rarer medium is one in which the velocity of light is more . the speed of light in air is x m s . . m s in water and m s in glass . thus . when air and water are compared . air is optically rarer than water . when air and glass are compared . air is optically rarer than glass . similarly . when we compare water and glass . then water is optically rarer than glass . this means light has its maximum velocity in air . then in water and least in glass .
star apparent star position ray path refractive index increasing fig . apparent position of star due to atmospheric refraction .
 . combined resistance of three resistances connected in parallel in figure . three resistances r . r and r are connected parallel to one another between the same two points a and b . a battery of v volts has been applied across the ends of this combination . in this case the potential difference across the ends of all the three resistances will be the same . and it will be equal to the voltage of the battery used . the current flowing through the three resistances connected in parallel is . however . not the same . suppose the total current flowing through the circuit is i . then the current passing
principle of electric generator the electric generator is an application of electromagnetic inductor . the electric generator works on the principle that when a straight conductor is moved in a magnetic field . then current is induced in the conductor . in an electric generator . a rectangular coil is made to rotate rapidly in the magnetic field between the poles of a horse shoe type magnet . when the coil rotates . it cuts the magnetic field lines due to which a current is produced in the coil . types of electric generator . ac generator . dc generator
will be real and inverted . and highly magnified or highly enlarged . from this discussion we conclude that when an object is placed at the focus of a convex lens . the image formed is i at infinity . ii real and inverted . and iii highly enlarged . suppose we have a convex lens of focal length cm . then its focus f will be at a distance of cm from it . so . by saying that the object is placed at the focus of this convex lens . we mean that the object is placed at a distance of cm from the convex lens on its left side . in this case the convex lens converts the diverging rays of light coming from the object into a parallel beam of light rays which form an image at infinity or very large distance .
the ray ao is called the incident ray . ob the refracted ray and bc the emergent ray . angle aon is the angle of incidence i . angle bom is the angle of refraction r and the angle cbm is the angle of emergence e .
candle as the object then the image of its wick will be formed on a white screen placed at the image position . if we look at the image a b . we find that it is wrong side up having arrow head at its bottom . so . we say that the image is inverted . the size of image is larger than the object . so the image is magnified . and
please note that in all our ray diagrams the object . an arrow ab figure . pointing upwards . will be placed on the principal axis . so . a ray of light coming from the bottom b of the object always travels along the principal axis and gets reflected back along the same path . we . however . do not put arrows on the principal axis to show this ray of light . we will now draw the ray diagrams to show the images formed by a concave mirror for the different positions of an object . we will consider all the six positions of the object . one by one .
 . . merits of hydroelectricity . hydro energy is a clean and renewable energy source . hydro energy is renewed naturally by rainwater and melting of snow on high mountains during summer .
it should be noted that the solenoid containing soft iron core in it acts as a magnet only as long as the current is flowing in the solenoid . if we switch off the current in the solenoid . it no more behaves as a magnet . all the magnetism of the soft iron core disappears as soon as the current in the coil is switched off . a very important point to be noted is that it is the iron piece inside the coil which becomes a strong electromagnet on passing the current . the core of an electromagnet must be of soft iron because soft iron loses all of its magnetism when current in the coil is switched off . on the other hand . if steel is used for making the core of an electromagnet . the steel does not lose all its magnetism when the current is stopped and it becomes a permanent magnet . this is why steel is not used for making electromagnets . electromagnets can be made in different shapes and sizes depending on the purpose for which they are to be used .
in volts on the dial of the voltmeter . a voltmeter has a high resistance so that it takes a negligible current from the circuit . the term volt gives rise to the word voltage . voltage is the other name for potential difference . we will now solve some problems based on potential difference .
electric generator an electric generator converts kinetic energy into electrical energy . the fact that a changing magnetic field induces a current in a conductor is used in an electric generator . a coil kept between the poles of a magnet is rotated . the current induced in the coil changes direction after each half rotation . in an ac generator . this
other side of the prism . please note that when the glass prism is kept on its base as shown in figure . then the red colour is at the top and violet colour is at the bottom of the spectrum . the splitting up of white light into seven colours on passing through a transparent medium like a glass prism is called dispersion of light . the formation of spectrum of seven colours shows that white light is made up of lights of seven different colours mixed together . that is . white light is a mixture of seven colours or seven coloured lights . the effect of glass prism is only to separate the seven colours of white light . a similar band of seven colours is produced when a beam of white light from an electric bulb falls on a triangular glass prism . we can explain the dispersion of light by a glass prism as follows .
the residue left in a biogas plant is excellent manure rich in nitrates and phosphates .
the other hand . the current is inversely proportional to resistance . so . if the resistance is doubled . the current gets halved . and if the resistance is halved . the current gets doubled . thus . the strength of an electric current in a given conductor depends on two factors i potential difference across the ends of the conductor . and ii resistance of the conductor . we will now discuss the electrical resistance of a conductor in detail .
virtual image . virtual image is formed . when reflected or refracted light rays do not actually intersect at a point but appear to meet at a point . . virtual image cannot be obtained on a screen . . virtual image is erect . i in case of mirror virtual image is formed behind or inside a mirror . ii in case of lens virtual image is formed on the same side of the object in front .
this constant is called refractive index . we will now discuss the refractive index in somewhat detail .
safety devices to prevent accidents . safety devices are used in circuits involving high voltages normally . v or more . these safety devices break the circuit whenever an abnormally high current flows through it . common safety devices include the fuse and the circuit breaker . you already know how a fuse works . the fuse wire melts when the current through it exceeds its rated value . this breaks the circuit . let us see how a circuit breaker works . a circuit breaker has a switch and a solenoid connected in series in the live line of a circuit . a heavy soft iron core lies partially in the solenoid . when a current greater than a particular value passes through the solenoid . the core gets pulled in . the core hits the switch to open it and break the circuit . the switch can be turned on again manually once the electrical fault is rectified . figure . shows how a circuit breaker works .
illustrations how can you charge a metal sphere positively without touching it ans . let us consider an uncharged metal sphere a . as shown in figure a . now a negatively charged rod is brought near the sphere a . which induces positive charge on the surface of sphere a near it and an equal negative charge on the surface away from it . as shown in figure . b . iiiiiiiiii the negatively charged surface of sphere a is then connected to earth . so that negative charge flows into the earth . as shown in figure . c . holding the negatively charged rod at the same position . earthing is removed . as shown in figure d . now when negatively charged . rod is removed the positive charge then gets spread on the entire surface of sphere a as shown in figure e . tttttttttt tttttttttt ilulu c 
as discussed earlier sign conventions for mirrors . the sign conventions for lenses remain the same . we shall however write the sign conventions for lenses and also form a tabular column of the same for better understanding .
replace the cell connections in the circuit as shown in fig . b . this would result in the change of the direction of current through the copper wire . that is . from south to north .
 . effect of the nature of material of the conductor the electrical resistance of a conductor say . a wire depends on the nature of the material of which it is made . some materials have low resistance whereas others have high resistance . for example . if we take two similar wires . having equal lengths and diameters . of copper metal and nichrome alloy . we will find that the resistance of nichrome wire is about times more than that of the copper wire . this shows that the resistance of a conductor depends on the nature of the material of the conductor .
the above six cases have been summarised in the table below for quick reference table . for a concave mirror
 . lens formula and magnification lens formula as we have a formula for spherical mirrors . we also have a formula for spherical lenses . this formula gives the relationship between object distance u . image distance v and the focal length f . the lens formula is expressed as v u f . . . . the lens formula given above is general and is valid in all situations for any spherical lens . take proper care of the signs of different quantities . while putting numerical values for solving problems relating to lenses .
 . renewable sources of energy those sources of energy which are being produced continuously in nature and are inexhaustible . are called renewable sources of energy . for example . wood is a renewable source of energy because if trees
hot water here storage tank solar energy sunshine ae ger hot water cold water pe hot water copper tubes painted black from outside solar water heater box painted black from inside and having a glass lid cold water freshwater fig . a solar water heater . water is heated in the copper tubes and fed to the storage tank .
 . resistance of different materials in a water pipe . the length and cross sectional area determines the resistance that the pipe offers to the flow of water . longer pipes with smaller cross sectional areas offer greater resistance . similar effects are found in the electrical case . for a wide range of materials . it is found that the resistance of a conductor is . directly proportional to the length of the conductor i . e . . r o l . . . . . . inversely proportional to the cross sectional area of the conductor i . e . . ra . . . . combining equations . and . . we have r o l . . . . r pl . . . . where p rho is a constant and is called the electrical resistivity or specific resistance of the material of the conductor . it is a characteristic property of the material . let l and a . then equation . gives p r .
resistivity is independent of the length and cross sectional area of the conductor . both resistance and resistivity vary with temperature . metals and alloys have very low resistivity in the range of m to m . they are good conductors of electricity . insulators like rubber and glass have resistivity of the order of to m . table . reveals that the resistivity of an alloy is generally higher than that of its constituent metals .
i x r i x r i r or i x r i x r r cancelling i from both sides . we get resultant resistance combined resistance or equivalent resistance . r r r
colour spectrum nd prism white light st prism white light recombination screen v white light white o light dispersion fig . recombination of white light using two prisms .
blue light has shorter wavelength . so it is scattered more easily . on the other hand . red light has longer wavelength . so it is not scattered much . in other words . the blue coloured light present in white sunlight is scattered much more easily than the red light . in fact . the blue light present in sunlight is scattered times more than the red light .
choice of a good fuel the fuel which we choose for our domestic or industrial use should have a high calorific value . this means that the fuel chosen should be such that it gives us more heat per unit mass . the fuel should burn without giving any smoke or harmful gases . in other words . the combustion products produced by the burning of fuel should not be poisonous . and they should not pollute the environment . carbon dioxide and water vapour are the harmless products produced by the burning of fuels . but some fuels produce poisonous gases like carbon monoxide co and sulphur dioxide so . etc . . which pollute the air around us . the fuel should have a proper ignition temperature which should be well above the normal room temperature .
 . . electric energy electric energy is defined as the total amount of work done to maintain current in a circuit in a given time . therefore . w vit joule . . . . since vi p . therefore . w pxt . . . . w since p vi i²r . therefore . electric energy is also represented r . by the equations w pxt i²rt vit . . . . r thus . electric energy consumed by a device is equal to the product of the power of the device and the time for which the device is used .
hand so that your thumb points in the direction of current . then the direction in which your fingers encircle the wire will give the direction of magnetic field lines around the wire . figure shows a straight current carrying wire ab in which the current is flowing vertically upwards from a to b . to find out the direction of magnetic field lines produced by this current . we imagine the wire ab to be held in our right hand as shown in figure so that our thumb points in the direction of current towards b . now . the direction in which our fingers are folded gives the direction of magnetic field lines . in this case our fingers are folded in the anticlockwise direction . so the direction of magnetic field or magnetic field lines is also in the anticlockwise direction as shown by the circle drawn at the top of the wire . do maxwell s right hand thumb rule is also known as maxwell s corkscrew rule corkscrew is a device for pulling corks from bottles . and consists of a spiral metal rod and a handle . according to maxwell s corkscrew rule imagine driving a corkscrew in the direction of current then the direction in which we turn its handle is the direction of magnetic field or magnetic field lines . the corkscrew rule is illustrated in figure . in figure . the direction of current is vertically downwards . now . if we imagine driving the corkscrew downwards in the direction of current . then the handle of corkscrew is to be turned in the clockwise direction . so . the direction of magnetic field or magnetic field lines will also be in the clockwise direction . this example is opposite to the one we considered in right hand thumb rule given above . thus . when electric current flows vertically upwards the direction of magnetic field produced is anticlockwise . on the other hand . when electric current flows vertically downwards then the direction of magnetic field is clockwise .
in our ray diagrams . the object is always placed above the principal axis . so the height hy of the object will always be positive . we also know that a virtual image is always formed above the principal axis . therefore . the height hz of a virtual image will be positive . but a real image is formed below the principal axis . so the height h of a real image will be negative because it is measured in the downward direction . from this discussion we conclude that though the height of object hy is always positive . the height h of the image can be either positive or negative .
the magnetism produced inside the human body by the flow of ionic currents forms the basis of a technique called magnetic resonance imaging mri which is used to obtain images or pictures of the internal parts of our body see figure . it is obvious that magnetism has an important use in medical diagnosis because . through mri scans . it enables the doctors to see inside the body . for example . mri can detect cancerous tissue inside the body of a person . please note that the magnetism in human body is actually electromagnetism which is produced by the flow of ionic currents inside the human body . before we go further . and describe the force acting on a current carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field . please
 . magnetic field due to a current carrying circular coil in the previous section . we considered a straight wire . now . let us bend the wire into a circular shape . pass the coil through a cardboard as shown in figure . . connect the free ends of the coil to a battery and a key . sprinkle some iron filings on the cardboard . put on the key . you will find that the iron filings arrange themselves in the form of concentric circles as shown in the figure . . the magnetic lines of forces near each segment of wire are circular and form concentric circles . whereas the lines of force near the centre of the coil are almost straight lines . note that at the centre of the coil . the magnetic field is uniform and perpendicular to the plane of the coil . the same experiment can be performed by using a magnetic compass and plotting the lines of forces .
natural gas can now be transported to different places through pipelines . this is possible by compressing the gas under high pressure . this compressed gas is called compressed natural gas cng . this compressed gas can be transported to various places by tanks and pipelines . cng is now being used as a fuel for transport vehicles . its burning produces carbon dioxide and water with no polluting gases or particulate matter . thus . it is a clean fuel to use .
near sightedness myopia near sightedness is a defect of vision due to which a person is not able to see distant objects clearly this defect is also called short sightedness or myopia . it arises mainly due to two reasons .
the following are the ill effects of using fossil fuels i global warming . ii air pollution . iii water and land pollution . iv thermal pollution . reducing pollution caused by fossil fuels reducing the amount of fuel used . ii more efficient engines and combustion systems . iii heat and energy recovery and re use . iv alternate delivery systems mass transit vehicles than private vehicles . v improved energy conservation insulation . vi reducing the amount of emissions produced using cleaner fuels . vii using alternate energy sources . generating energy from renewable resources . vii using solar . geothermal . hydroelectric . tidal and wind power .
illustrations light from a point source in air falls on a convex spherical glass surface u . . radius of curvature cm . the distance of light source from the glass surface is cm . at what position is the image formed ans . here m . u . . u cm r cm . r is ve for a convex refracting surface as m m m m v u r . . . o of v cm thus the image is formed at a distance of cm from the glass surface . in the direction of incident light . 
one coulomb a body is said to have coulomb of charge if it contains . x electrons . milli coulomb mc c micro coulomb uc c
this is due to the fact that the magnetic field produced by a current carrying wire at a given point depends directly on the current passing through it . therefore . if there is a circular coil having n turns . the field produced is n times as large as that produced by a single turn . this is because the current in each circular turn has the same direction . and the field due to each turn then just adds up .
the condition can be corrected with a converging or convex lens . as shown in fig . . in this case . the rays of light are first converged by the convex lens and then by the eye lens . due to this combined action the image is formed on the retina . in fact . the rays of light starting from the normal near point converge on passing through the convex lens . and should appear to come from n . the near point of the hypermetropic eye . this is shown in fig . .
formula for calculating electric power we know that work done time taken yer p w d or or . . . we have already studied that the work done w by current i when it flows for time t under a potential difference v is given by w v x x t joules mystudygear putting this value of w in equation . we get vxixt p joules per second p v x i joules per second or power . p v i watts where v potential difference or voltage in volts and i current in amperes thus . the power in watts is found by multiplying the potential difference in volts by the current in amperes . we can write down the above formula for electric power in words as follows electric power potential difference current since the potential difference is also known by the name of voltage . we can also say that electric power voltage current it is clear from the above discussion that in electric circuits . the power expended in heating a resistor or turning a motor depends upon the potential difference between the terminals of the device and the electric current passing through it .
wind energy in india the wind power potential of india is estimated to be billion watt . mw . till the end of last century india has an installed capacity of more than mw for generating electrical energy from wind energy . this capacity is sure to increase with the commissioning of new power stations . at present . largest wind energy farm is established near kanyakumari in tamil nadu . it can generate mw electricity
a solar heating device is one which uses the heat radiated by the sun . focus concave reflector sun rays fig . a concave reflector . the glass cover used in solar heating devices allows the shorter wavelength infrared rays of the sun to enter the solar heating device . but does not allow the rays to escape from it . some of the different ways in which solar energy can be utilised are . solar cooker . solar water heater . solar cell ssssssssss editoseeede heterobe trois l or desidere sos s sssss best fig . a picture of a solar cooker . a solar cooker utilises the heat of the sun for cooking .
no noaa b fig . . moving the magnet induces a current in the coil .
some of the important limitations or disadvantages of i the solar cooker cannot be used to cook food during night time because sunshine is not available at that time . ii if the day sky is covered with clouds . even then solar cooker cannot be used to cook food . iii the direction of reflector of solar cooker has to be changed from time to time to keep it facing the sun . iv the box type solar cooker cannot be used for baking making chapattis . etc . or for frying .
dc motor an electric motor is a device which uses electricity to rotate a rod . known as the shaft . the rotation of the shaft can be used to rotate anything e . g . . a wheel . the blades of a fan . etc . attached to it . the basic design and working of a dc electric motor are described below . construction of a dc motor
competition window nuclei composition and properties of nuclei the nucleus of an atom contains protons and neutrons which are collectively known as nucleons . the number of protons in a nucleus is called its atomic number and is denoted by . the total number of protons and neutrons in a nucleus is called its mass number and is denoted by a . number of protons in a nucleus number of nucleons in a nucleus a . number of neutrons in a nucleus n a z .
biogas plant the arrangement in which biogas is obtained by the fermentation of biomass is called a biogas plant . the most common types of biogas plants used in india are fixed dome type biogas plant floating gas holder type biogas plant both the biogas plants require animal dung and plant waste as a raw material . organic domestic and agriculture waste can also be added to it .
 a plane mirror forms a virtual image . such an image is not formed by the actual intersection of light rays and cannot be formed on a screen . the image formed by a plane mirror is erect . so . the image of a person formed by a plane mirror has the head at the top and the feet at the bottom . the image is formed as far behind the mirror as the object is in front of it . the size of the image formed by a plane mirror is equal to that of the object . the image is laterally inverted . this means that in the image formed by a plane mirror . the left and right sides are reversed .
 iii distances measured against the direction of incident light are taken as negative . iv distances measured upward and perpendicular to the principal axis are taken as positive . v distances measured downward and perpendicular to the principal axis are taken as negative .
if the motion of the magnet is stopped . the galvanometer again shows no deflection as shown in figure c . thus . the current in the coil flows as long as the magnet is moving .
magnetic field of earth a freely suspended magnet always points in the north south direction even in the absence of any other magnet . this suggests that the earth itself behaves as a magnet which causes a freely suspended magnet
if the earth had no atmosphere consisting of air . there would have been no scattering of my studygear sunlight at all . in that case no light from the sky would have entered our eyes and the sky would have looked dark and black to us .
in figure . we have a plane mirror mm . the ray of light which falls on the mirror surface is called the incident ray . in figure . ao is the incident ray of light . the incident ray gives the direction in which light falls on the mirror . the point at which the incident ray falls on the mirror is called the point of incidence . in figure . point o on the surface of the mirror is the point of incidence because the incident ray ao touches the mirror surface at this point . we know that when a ray of light falls on a mirror . the mirror sends it back in another direction and we say that the mirror has reflected the ray of light . the ray of light which is sent back by the mirror is called the reflected ray . in figure . ob is the reflected ray of light . the reflected ray of light shows the direction in which the light goes after reflection from the mirror .
spherical lenses a piece of transparent medium bounded by atleast one spherical surface is called a spherical lens . lenses are of two types i convex or converging lenses ii concave or diverging lenses
 . domestic electric circuits the electricity generated by a power plant is usually alternating ac . its voltage is volt to volt . the power stations are located far away from the cities and industrial area and hence transmission of electricity is done with the help of high tension cables by stepping up the voltage up to volt . before distribution the voltage and electric voltage is brought down to v . v or v as per the requirement using step down transformers .
when the relaxed eye produces an image of a distant object behind the retina . as in figure . . the condition is known as hyperopia or hypermetropia . and the person is said to be far sighted or long sighted . with this defect . nearby objects are blurred . this defect is due to the following reasons i due to shortening of eyeball . ii the ciliary muscle is unable to change the shape of the lens enough to properly focus the image i . e . . the focal length of the eye lens is too long thus . despite the eye lens exerting its maximum power of accommodation . the image is formed behind the retina .
summary of the images formed by a concave mirror position of object position of image size of image nature of image . within focus behind the mirror enlarged virtual and erect between pole p and focus f . at focus f at infinity highly enlarged real and inverted . between f and c beyond c enlarged real and inverted . at c at c equal to object real and inverted . beyond c between f and c diminished real and inverted . at infinity at focus f highly diminished real and inverted
nuclear energy a physical reaction which involves changes in the nucleus of an atom is called a nuclear reaction . the energy released during a nuclear reaction is called nuclear energy because it comes from the nucleus of an atom . nuclear energy can be obtained by two types of nuclear reactions i nuclear fission and ii nuclear fusion
uses of convex mirrors as a rear view in vehicles convex mirrors are used as rear view mirrors in vehicles cars . trucks . buses . etc . to see traffic at the backside . this is due to the following reasons a convex mirrors always form an erect and diminished image . b they have a wider field of view as they are curved outwards . for this purpose . plane mirrors may also be used . but a convex mirror is preferred because the field of view is wider than that of a plane mirror . convex mirror plane mirror field of view field of view
the compressed air flows out to the atmosphere after passing through a turbine . as the wave recedes . the water level in the column decreases . and this draws in air from the atmosphere . the incoming air also passes through the turbine . the turbine is specially designed to move in the same direction irrespective of the direction of the air flow . the turbine is connected to a generator to produce electricity .
connect the ends of a small . thick aluminium or copper wire to two long . thin wires . use these wires to hang the aluminium wire from a support . connect the wires to a battery and switch . as shown in figure a . place a horse shoe magnet as shown . the aluminium wire should swing freely between the poles . turn on the switch to pass a current . the aluminium wire will move . showing that the magnetic field exerts a force on it . note the direction in which the wire moves . turn the magnet upside down to change the direction of the magnetic field . now when a current is passed through the wire . the wire moves in the opposite direction . the direction in which the wire moves also changes if you change the direction of the current by interchanging the connection of the battery . .
 alternatively . following reactions are also possible for the fusion of three deuterium nuclei h h² heº on . mev heº h² he h . mev the energy output in the process of nuclear fusion . mev is quite less than the energy liberated in the fission of a u nucleus mev . but this does not imply that fusion is a weaker source of energy than fission . the number of hydrogen nuclei in gram of heavy hydrogen is much more than the number of u nuclei in gram uranium . therefore . the energy by the fusion of a certain mass of heavy hydrogen is much more than the energy released by the fission of equal mass of uranium . it may alternatively be explained as fusion reaction mass defect energy released h h h h . amu . mev h h he on . amu . mev net h he h on . amu . mev thus . a mass defect of . x amu is noticed out of amu or about . mass decay is responsible for release of energy in nuclear fission it was . . huge amount of energy is required to overpower the coulombic forces of repulsion between two nuclei which is obtained by triggering nuclear fission . the temperature corresponding to nuclear fusion is about . x k . the requisite condition for fusion reaction exists in stars and in the sun . though the sun s surface temperature is only about k . its internal temperature is as high as . x k . under these conditions . h nuclei undergoes fusion to form helium nuclei and in the process a continuous emission of solar energy occurs . therefore . fusion is also referred to as thermonuclear reaction . it is an uncontrolled reaction and the principle is used in the formation of hydrogen bomb .
force on a current carrying conductor in a magnetic field when a current carrying wire is placed in a magnetic field such as that due to a permanent magnet . it experience a magnetic force .
limitations of tidal energy for a tidal power plant to be effective . the difference between the water levels at high tide and low tide should be about metres . not many places have this . only areas with an average energy density of mw per kilometre are considered to be economically viable for generating electricity from the ocean . so far . only about a hundred sites have been identified where tidal power plants can be located . for this reason . tidal energy is not considered to be a major source of electrical power . existing tidal power plants include a power plant in brittany . france . and one in nova scotia . canada . in india . three sites have been identified for harnessing tidal energy . these sites are in the sundarbans in bengal . on the gulf of kutch and the gulf of cambay in gujarat .
light waves travel faster in air but slower in glass . now . when a beam of light consisting of light waves and travelling in air falls on a glass slab obliquely then the part of light waves on the left side of the beam of light reaches the glass slab first at point a and slows down first on entering the glass slab see figure . the rest of light waves on the right side of the beam of light are still in air and have to travel more distance in air before reaching the glass slab at point b and hence slow down a little later on entering the glass slab see figure . since the speed of left side of the beam of light is reduced a little before its
 . laws of reflection all surfaces which can reflect light . obey the following two laws called the laws of reflection . all reflections take place in accordance with these laws .
when the tense eye produces an image of a distant object in front of the retina . as in fig . . the condition is known as myopia or short sightedness . and the person is said to be short sighted . with this defect . far off objects are blurred . this defect is due to the following reasons i either the eyeball is longer than normal or ii the maximum focal length due to excessive curvature of the eye lens of the lens is insufficient to produce a clearly formed image on the retina .
s . position of object no . . at infinity . beyond f . at f . between f and f . at the principal focus . between the optical centre and the principal focus
again suppose that . on burning . fuel a produces gases like co . ho . co . so . so . etc . . whereas fuel b produces only co and ho . out of these gases carbon monoxide co . sulphur dioxide so and sulphur trioxide so are poisonous gases or harmful gases . now . since fuel a produces poisonous gases like co . so and so . on burning . therefore . fuel a is not a good fuel . on the other hand . burning of fuel b produces only harmless products like carbon dioxide co and water vapour ho . so fuel b is a better fuel . similarly . if a fuel burns with an explosion . it will not be a good fuel and if it leaves behind a lot of ash on burning . even then it cannot be a good fuel . let us solve one problem now .
do you know planets do not twinkle . because planets are very close to the earth as compared to the stars . so the intensity of light we receive from the planets is very large . therefore . the variation in the brightness of the planets is not detected .
nuclide it is a specific nucleus of an atom which is characterised by its atomic number z and mass number a . it is represented by zx where x is the chemical symbol of the element . i
the electric current is a flow of electric charges called electrons in a conductor such as a metal wire . the magnitude of electric current in a conductor is the amount of electric charge passing through a given point of the conductor in one second . if a charge of q coulombs flows through a conductor in time t seconds . then the magnitude i of the electric current flowing through it is given by current .
 . processing of nuclear fuels the fuels like u used in nuclear reactors are radioactive . hence . mining and enrichment of uranium involves a great risk of nuclear radiations to the persons involving in these processes .
hydroelectricity electricity generated by using the kinetic energy of flowing water is called hydroelectricity . the electric power thus generated is called hydroelectric power . electricity is generated from flowing water at a hydroelectric power plant . for large hydroelectric plants . water from a river is diverted to a large reservoir . which is an artificial lake to store water . a high dam is constructed on one side of the reservoir to hold back the water . the building housing the generator is at the base of the dam . on its other side . water flows down through pipes from near the top of the dam to the generator house below . it strikes the blades of a water turbine with tremendous speed . making it rotate . the turbine rotates the shaft of a generator to which it is connected . this makes the generator produce electricity . in this way . the kinetic energy of flowing water is used to rotate the turbine . and the rotational kinetic energy is converted into electrical energy . it is not necessary to set up large dams for hydroelectric plants . small hydroelectric plants can be set up to generate electricity from a few hundred kilowatts to tens of megawatts . such plants can use water diverted from a waterfall or from a dam built for irrigation . 
at noon . the sun is overhead . the rays of light from the sun enter the atmosphere normally and hence they do not bend at all while passing through the atmosphere . therefore . the sun appears circular at noon .
in figure . . zaon zbon . and the three lines ao . the same laws hold for reflection from a curved surface as well . we can determine the path of the reflected ray by drawing the normal to the curved surface at the point of incidence of light . to draw a normal at a point o on a curved surface . first draw a tangent pq to the surface at that point figure . . a normal on to this tangent is also normal to the curved surface . for a spherical surface . a radius through a point on the surface is normal to the surface .
the two insulated wires l and n . coming from the electric pole . enter a box fitted just inside our house . in this box . a main fuse f is put in the live wire . this fuse has a high rating of about amperes . the two line wires then enter the electricity meter m which records the electrical energy consumed by us in the units of kilowatt hours . the main fuse and the meter are both installed by the electric supply department of our city .
figure shows three resistances r . r and r connected in series . a battery of v volts has been applied to the ends of this series combination of resistances . now . suppose the potential difference across the resistance r is v . the potential difference across the resistance r is v and that across resistance r is v . we have applied a battery of voltage v . so the total potential difference across the three resistances should be equal to the voltage of the battery applied . that is . v v v v . . . . we have just seen that the total potential difference due to battery is v . now . let the total resistance or resultant resistance of the combination be r . the current flowing through the whole circuit is i .
on a careful study of figure . . we find that at every point of the wire the magnetic field lines are concentric circles with ever increasing radii as we move away from the wire . when we reach the centre of the circular loop . the arcs of these big circles start appearing as straight lines . it is to be noted that every point on the circular current carrying wire gives rise to the magnetic field appearing as straight lines at the centre . by applying the right hand thumb rule . we find that every section of the wire contributes to the magnetic field lines in the same direction within the loop .
 the size of the moon is much smaller than stars . still it appears bigger . why ans . the apparent size of an object as seen by our eyes depends on the visual angle . the moon is much closer to the earth than the stars . hence moon subtends a greater visual angle at our yes appears bigger than the stars .
 ii cones are the cone shaped cells present in the retina of an eye which are sensitive to bright light or normal light . the cone cells of our retina also respond to colours . in other words . cone cells cause the sensation of colour of objects in our eyes . the cone shaped cells of the retina make us see colours and also make us distinguish between various colours see figure . cone cells of the retina function only in bright light . the cones do not function in dim light . this is why when it is getting dark at night . it becomes impossible to see colours of cars on the road .
appears to be at position b above the horizon . due to atmospheric refraction of light rays coming from it this is because our eye will see the sun at that position from where light enters it in the straight line direction 
magnetic effect of current or electromagnetism the magnetic effect of current was discovered by oersted in . oersted found that a wire carrying a current was able to deflect a compass needle . now . the compass needle is a tiny magnet which can be deflected only by a magnetic field . since a current carrying wire was able to deflect a compass needle . it was concluded that a current flowing in a wire always gives rise to a magnetic field around it . the importance of magnetic effect of current lies in the fact that it gives rise to mechanical forces . the electric motor . electric generator . telephone and radio . all utilize the magnetic effect of current . the magnetic effect of current is also called electromagnetism which means electricity produces magnetism .
energy from biomass what is biomass in the context of energy production . bíomass is any organic matter from which we can get energy on a renewable basis . it includes agricultural residues . wood . animal excreta . wastes from food processing and municipal wastes . agricultural residues include straw . hay and husk . waste from food processing includes bagasse . which is the residue left after extracting the juice from sugar cane . cow dung gobar has been a traditional biomass fuel in our country . since plants trap solar energy in the form of food . and animals eat plants . the ultimate source of biomass energy is the sun
in series combination of resistors . we have rs r r r . . . in series combination of resistors . the equivalent resistance is more than any of the individual resistance .
newton originally named only five primary colours red . yellow . green . blue and violet . only later did he introduce orange and indigo . giving seven colours by analogy to the number of notes in a musical scale . some sources now omit indigo . partly due to the poor ability of humans to distinguish colours oor ability of humans to distinguish colours in the blue portion of the visual spectrum .
before we solve problems involving direction of current . direction of magnetic field and the direction of force by using fleming s left hand rule . we should keep the following points in mind 
please note that in this case the ray of light has to pass through the second focus f of the convex lens which lies on its left side .
b field hand а direction of magnetic direction of current straight wire carrying current right figure . right hand thumb rule to find the direction of magnetic field .
how the current flows in a wire we know that electric current is a flow of electrons in a metal wire or conductor when a cell or battery is applied across its ends . a metal wire has plenty of free electrons in it .
in india there are limited places where geothermal energy can be utilised .
introduction ever watchful . the lion on the title page drinks from a quiet pool . whose smooth mirror like surface acts to double his presence . mirrors produce images because the light that strikes them is reflected . rather than absorbed . reflected light does much more than produce dramatic and beautiful pictures . however . for example . it allows our sense of vision to be remarkably useful . when we see an object . light from it enters our eyes and evokes the sensation of vision . thus . we can say that light is a form of energy which . excites in us the sensation of sight .
 . the pollution of air caused by burning petroleum fuels like petrol and diesel in vehicles can be controlled by fitting the vehicles with catalytic converters see figure . the catalytic converter is a device which changes the harmful gases coming from the engine of a car into harmless gases before releasing them into air . for example . the catalytic converter brings about the complete combustion of the poisonous gas carbon monoxide to form carbon dioxide which is not poisonous at all . it also changes harmful nitrogen oxides into harmless nitrogen gas . the catalytic converter is fitted in the exhaust system of a vehicle like a car .
in our everyday life . we use plane mirrors of different shapes and sizes depending on where they are being used . but in a science laboratory . a small rectangular strip of plane mirror is usually used for performing experiments on the reflection of light . in our diagrams . a plane mirror is represented by a straight line having a number of short . oblique lines on one side see figure b . the plane side of straight line is the front side of the mirror where the reflection of light takes place . and the side having short . oblique lines represents the back side of the plane mirror . in figure b . the straight line mm read as mm dash represents a plane mirror .
 d coolant a coolant liquid molten na or heavy water circulates through the reactor core to carry off the heat generated by the nuclear fission . the liquid enters the base of the reactor core and come out at the top . the heat carried by the circulating liquid coming out from top is used for producing steam . as a result the liquid cools down and is pumped back to the base of the reactor . the cooling liquid also serves as the neutrons moderator .
for removal . the floating gas holder type biogas plant is expensive and has increased cost of maintenance because it has to be painted frequently to prevent it from corrosion and leakage of the gas .
direction of electric current when electricity was invented a long time back . it was known that there are two types of charges positive charges and negative charges . but the electron had not been discovered at that time . so . electric current was considered to be a flow of positive charges and the direction of flow of the positive charges was taken to be the direction of electric current . thus . the conventional direction of electric current is from positive terminal of a cell or battery to the negative terminal . through the outer circuit . so . in our circuit diagrams . we put the arrows on the connecting wires pointing from the positive terminal of the cell towards the negative terminal of the cell . to show the direction of conventional current see figure . the
opticians prescribe corrective lenses indicating their powers . if a person has been prescribed a corrective lens of power . d . this means that the lens prescribed is convex and has a focal length of f p m
please note that though in the reflection of light . the angle of reflection is always equal to the angle of incidence . but in the refraction of light . the angle of refraction is usually not equal to the angle of incidence . the angle of refraction is either smaller than the angle of incidence or greater than the angle of
 a in certain people . the eyeball becomes elongated . i . e . . longer than the normal eye . as a result . the distance of the retina from the crystalline lens increases . then . even for the maximum focal length of the eye lens . i . e . . when the ciliary muscles are most relaxed . parallel rays of light from faraway objects get focused at a point before the retina figure . a . b in some cases . the curvatures of the cornea or the lens are such that the eye lens has a shorter focal length more power than usual . in such cases also . the image forms short of the retina .
devices that use current carrying conductors and magnetic fields include electric motor . electric generator . loudspeakers . microphones and measuring instruments .
towards the focus f of the concave lens . it enters the concave lens and gets refracted or bends at point d . after passing through the concave lens . it becomes parallel to the principal axis of the lens and goes in the direction dx see figure .
for this you will require a plastic or a tennis ball . metal sheet . metal wire . cycle dynamo . pressure cooker . bulb . i take the ball and make three slits into it . ii cut out semicircular strips fins from the metal sheet . put them into these slits . iii pivot the ball on an axle through its centre with a straight metal wire fixed to a rigid support such that the tennis ball rotates freely about the axle . iv now . connect a cycle dynamo to this . v connect a bulb to this dynamo . vi direct a jet of steam produced in the pressure cooker at the fins fig . . does the bulb light up this is your thermal plant . steam pipe dynamo bulb pressure cooker tennis ball fitted with metal sheets heat fig . a home made thermal plant .
the availability of electrical energy to each individual in a country is one of the parameters to measure the growth of the country .
 . the new cartesian sign conventions and the mirror formula now a days the new cartesian sign conventions are followed for assigning signs to various distances which are to be measured in a ray diagram . these sign conventions are as follows 
laws of reflection the phenomenon of reflection is governed by following two laws first law the incident ray . the reflected ray and the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence . all lie in same plane . second law the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection . zi zr . note the laws of reflection are valid for any smooth reflecting surface irrespective of geometry . zi zr zi zr a 
a . c . generator a . c . generator means alternating current generator . that is . an a . c . generator produces alternating current . which reverses its direction continuously . a . c . generator is also known as an alternator . we will now describe the construction and working of an a . c . generator . construction of an a . c . generator
take a circular coil having large number of turns in the form of a loop or coil and pass it through the horizontal cardboard at two points m and n . connect the free ends of the coil in series with a battery through a rheostat to vary current and a key as shown in figure . sprinkle some iron filings on the cardboard . you may use a salt sprinkler for this purpose . when an electric current is passed through the coil by closing the key and the cardboard is gently tapped . it is found that the iron filings arrange themselves in a definite pattern representing the magnetic field lines due to the current carrying loop . place a compass on the cardboard to map the magnetic lines of force produced by the coil . by applying the right hand thumb rule to each section of the coil . it is found that the concentric lines of force pass around the coil in the same direction region a in figure .
a little less than half of the solar energy . approximately . that strikes the outer boundary of the earth . reaches its surface . the remaining part of the solar radiation gets reflected back into the space . a significant portion of the solar energy is absorbed by the earth s atmosphere . this energy is mostly in the form of ultraviolet radiations . the solar radiation that reaches earth s surface is mostly in the form of heat or infrared radiation and visible light .
presbyopia a human eye which cannot see the near objects clearly is said to suffer from a defect known as presbyopia . eye suffering from presbyopia cannot read and write comfortably . this is a kind of hypermetropia which
 ii mixing tank it is a tank with a slopingfloor made up of bricks on one side of the digester . it feeds
from faraday s law of electromagnetic induction . the induced emf across the coil is do d nba cos wt at at a or ε nbaw sin wt or ε . sin wt the maximum emf induced in the coil is given by eg nba sin wt or o fnba w af 
a diverging lens produces only one type of image . the image always lies between the focus and the optical centre . the following table gives the detailed information about the images formed by a concave lens . table . 
advantages of geothermal energy a geothermal plants can operate round the clock . unlike those based on solar and tidal energy b geothermal energy is almost pollution free . c it is cheaper to run a geothermal plant than a coal based plant . d the source of energy is free and renewable .
 . a pool of water appears to be less deep than it actually is if we look into a pool of water or tank of water . it appears to be less deep than it really is . this is due to the refraction of light which takes place when light rays pass from the pool of water into the air . let us understand it more clearly with the help of a ray diagram .
according to clock face rule . look at one face of a circular wire or coil through which a current is passing i if the current around the face of circular wire or coil flows in the clockwise direction . then that face of the circular wire or coil will be south pole s pole . ii if the current around the face of circular wire or coil flows in the anticlockwise direction . then that face of circular wire or coil will be a north pole n pole 
twinkling of stars light emitted by stars passes through the atmosphere of the earth before reaching our eyes . the atmosphere of the earth is not uniform but consists of many layers of different densities . the layers close to the surface of the earth are optically denser . as we go higher and higher . the density of layers and refractive index decreases progressively . as the light from a star enters the upper most layer of the atmosphere . it bends towards the normal as it enters the next layer .
he rh r . fig . circuit diagram to verify ohm s law .
suppose we have a convex lens of focal length cm . then its focus f will be at a distance of cm from it . so . by saying that the object is at f of this convex lens . we will mean that the object is at a distance of x cm from this convex lens on its left side . and by saying that the image is formed at f on the other side . we will mean that the image is formed at a distance of x cm from the convex lens on its right side .
a magnetic or compass needle it is a small piece of magnetised needle in the form of an arrowhead . the arrowhead is the north pole of the compass and the tail acts as the south pole . the north pole is usually coloured red . this needle is pivoted at the centre and enclosed by plastic or glass pieces on both sides . this needle is used to find the direction of earth s magnetic field and to test the polarity of another magnetic pole fig . .
the far point of eye having myopia or short sightedness is at point f which is less than infinity see figure b . please note that the rays of light coming from the person s far point f can just be focused by his eye on the retina as shown in figure b . this means that if the distant object can be made to appear as if it were at the far point f of this eye . then the eye can see it clearly . this is done by putting a concave lens in front of the eye as described below .
bi convex plano convex lens concavo convex lens lens fig . the three types of convex lenses .
when the rays of light . after reflection from a mirror . appear to meet at a point . then the image formed by these rays is said to be virtual . virtual images can t be obtained on a screen .
in figure . the current is flowing in the vertically downward direction and the direction of magnetic field is from left to right directed towards east . thus . the current carrying conductor is at right angles to the magnetic field . now . we have just seen that the motion of the conductor is in the forward direction towards south which is at right angles to both . the direction of current and the direction of magnetic field . since the direction of motion of the wire represents the direction of force acting on it . we can say that the direction of force acting on a current carrying wire placed in a magnetic field is i perpendicular to the direction of current . and ii perpendicular to the direction of magnetic field . in other words . we can say that the
spectrum red orange yellow green blue white light indigo violet fig . . dispersion of light by a prism produces a spectrum of its component colours . the splitting is exaggerated for clarity . the band of colours obtained in this activity is continuous . with a colour changing to the next colour in a smooth . gradual way . in other words . there is no sharp boundary between one colour and the next . however . in this band of colours one can distinguish seven main . or prominent . colours . these are violet . indigo . blue . green . yellow . orange and red . in sequence . this sequence of colours can be remembered as vibgyor . which is formed by the first letters of the names of the colours . whenever white light is split . its coloured components appear in this sequence . you see these colours in a rainbow too . when white light is dispersed . violet light deviates the most and red light deviates the least . this means . the refractive index of the prism material is the largest for violet and the least for red . the band of different colours obtained when white light is split is an example of a spectrum . which can be defined as follows .
harnessing energy turbines water wheels are so arranged that they are rotated by the moving waves . the rotating turbines generate electricity .
incident ray podoloog yo ray refracted s glass block emergent ie ray fig . refraction of light as it passes from air into glass and back into air . air glass o . i .
flows from a to b in the bulb . va vb . when the current flows from b to a in the bulb . va vb . when the current becomes momentarily zero before changing direction . va vb . in fact . the potential difference across the bulb changes gradually from a maximum value v . to zero and then to the minimum value v . from v . . it increases to zero before reaching v . once again . the way the potential difference voltage across the bulb changes with time is shown in figure . . a plot of the alternating current through the bulb will also be similar . starting from a particular value say . maximum or minimum . when the current or voltage reaches that value next . it is said to complete one cycle . if it completes cycle in one second . we say that its frequency is hertz hz . the frequency of our household ac supply is hz . i . e . . there are cycles per second . this means it changes direction times in second . since the value of the ac voltage across a device such as a heater or a bulb does not remain constant . what is the effect on the amount of heat produced it turns out that the heating effect of an ac voltage . whose peak value is vo . is the same as that produced by a constant voltage of v . . this value is called its rms voltage . when we say that the ac supply is at v . we mean its rms voltage is v . the peak value of such a supply would be v x v v .
a plane mirror neither converges parallel rays of light nor diverges them . the focal length of a plane mirror can be considered to be infinite or infinity which means very . very great or limitless .
coke is . however . more valuable when used as a reducing agent in the extraction of metals from their ores .
most mammals and many other animals are completely colour blind . but this condition is normal for their eyes . the cone cells of bees are sensitive to ultraviolet light . on the other hand . we cannot see objects in the ultraviolet light as our retina cones are not sensitive to ultraviolet light . therefore . bees can see objects in ultraviolet light and can perceive colours which we cannot do . the retina of a hen or cock has mostly cones and only a few rods . as the cones are sensitive to bright light only . the chick wakes up with the dawn sunrise and sleeps in the resting place by the dusk sunset .
 . . fossil fuels we shall now discuss some non renewable sources of energy which include coal . petroleum and natural gas . however . let us first understand why we call them as fossil fuels .
 b the direction of electric current is . however . taken to be opposite to the direction of flow of negative charges such as electrons . so . if we are given the direction of flow of electrons . then the direction of electric current will be taken as opposite to the direction of flow of electrons .
when an electric current flows through a solenoid . a magnetic field is set up around the solenoid which is similar to the magnetic field of a bar magnet . the magnetic field due to a solenoid carrying current
for a tidal power plant to be effective . the difference in water levels at low and high tides should be about metre .
diverging rays of light coming from a nearby object o placed at the normal near point n cm from the eye are converged to form an image i behind the retina due to which the eye cannot see the nearby object clearly see figure a . the image is formed behind the retina either due to low converging power of eye lens or because of eye ball being too short .
the magnitude of magnetic field produced by a current carrying circular loop or circular wire at its centre is i directly proportional to the current passing through the circular loop or circular wire . and
the power of a lens is said to be one dioptre if its focal length is metre . it should be remembered that in order to find the power of a lens . its focal length should first be converted into metre . since the focal length of a convex lens is positive . therefore a converging lens or convex power has a positive power . on the other hand . the focal length of a concave lens is negative therefore . a diverging lens or concave lens has a negative power . this means when the value of power is written for a convex lens it is given a positive sign . e . g . . if the power of a convex lens is d . it is written as d . on the other hand . when the value of power is written for a concave lens it is given a negative sign . e . g . . if the power of a concave lens is d it is written as d .
if the charge are small in size as compared to the distance r between them fæ or f k . where . k is a constant called coulomb s electrostatic force constant . the value of k is experimentally measured and is found to be equal to x nm c approximately in si system . its value for vacuum in cgs system is equal to . the constant k may be expressed as k where . eo epsilon zero is ntɛo called absolute electrical permittivity of vacuum . the value of εy is . x c n m or f m . this gives the value of k . x n m² c . thus magnitude of force is f . . p 
through a switch . an ammeter a has been put in series with the resistor r . this is to measure current in the circuit . a voltmeter v has been connected across the ends of the resistor r . that is . voltmeter is connected in parallel with the resistor . this voltmeter is to measure potential difference or voltage across the ends of the resistor r . before we go further and discuss ohm s law . please answer the following questions 
we can see from figure that the only difference between a d . c . generator and an a . c . generator is in the way the two ends of the generator coil are linked to the outer circuit . in a d . c . generator we connect the two ends of the coil to a commutator consisting of two half rings of copper . on the other hand . in an a . c . generator . we connect the two ends of the coil to two full rings of copper called slip rings . there is no commutator in an a . c . generator
parallel grouping when n cells . each of emf . ε and internal resistance r are connected in parallel to pass electric current through external resistance r . then net emf ne net internal resistance ww in cells s or rin r net external resistance r and then electric current through external resistance r is e ne r r n nr r 
scattered in different directions . the different colours of white light are reflected by the dust and water particles in the same way . due to this . the scattered light appears white because it still contains all the colours of white light . thus . when white sunlight falls on larger particles like dust particles and water droplets present in the atmosphere . it is scattered as such . so the scattered light also appears white .
nuclear fission the phenomenon of splitting up of a heavy nucleus . on bombardment with slow speed neutrons . into two fragments of comparable mass . with the release of two or more fast moving neutrons and a large amount of energy is known as nuclear fission . the first nuclear fission to be discovered was that of uranium . this nucleus as well as those of uranium and plutonium undergo fission when struck by slow moving neutrons . there are other heavy nuclei that can be induced to undergo fission . however these three are the only ones of practical importance . few different ways in which the uranium nucleus splits are shown below 
the upper portion of the spectacles consists of concave lens for the person to see distant objects and the lower portion consists of convex lens which help him to see nearby objects . to correct presbyopia . an old person has to use spectacles with a convex lens of suitable focal length . or power .
convex concave hollow sphere reflecting surface b fig . a spherical mirror is a section of a sphere . either the outside convex surface or the inside concave surface of the spherical section may be the reflecting surface .
 w . v uses electrical energy at the rate of w when connected to an electrical outlet supplying a pd of v . if the voltage is less . the power used po v will be less than w and the bulb gives less light dim . if the supply voltage is more than the prescribed voltage . more power is consumed the filament gets overheated and may burn out . the resistance of the electrical appliance can be calculated from its power rating as follows . suppose an electrical lamp is rated as w . v . then its resistance is found using the expression v r ohm p similarly . the maximum safe current through it can be measured as t p . a v the electric lamp will fuse if a current exceeds this value .
using a voltmeter to measure potential difference figure . shows a circuit that has two lamps connected to a cell . suppose we want to measure the potential difference across the lamp l . i . e . . between the points a and b . as a is on the side of the positive terminal of the cell . its potential is higher than that of b . so . the terminal of the
we can visualise the magnetic field lines around a bar magnet by sprinkling some iron filings near a bar magnet and tapping the sheet on which the magnet is placed . the iron filings will orient themselves as shown in figure . .
low melting point . as soon as the safe limit of current exceeds the fuse blows and the electric circuit is cut off . a fuse is always connected to the live wire in the beginning of a circuit in series before an appliance is connected . a copper wire cannot be used as a fuse wire because it has high resistance .
predatorsconhecer rest rongr barcode nor socross bessere forb eres s saab otsas cdsees . ee foodshedsarbergi sergearbesar top thì t hcs thpt hectores corse sh opagatecabece teleca odore berdas redane senior rese ser bre t gegee ore webberoend berete colore ago dolotoarcs broege r brella barretter pedregra . cana rene sadnes ete teen senere sold beste bong d ruge dara decoreldreces trelci dr herodactada omaan ce engage r ser bosans been ces osdal sceglo pog logo reces gesagescrea necesarea beascatena bscessories aces near gore ang agrraroodkregedo sorunlarge blog oceas ed beece bibrigedes to sus because proronolor ota dort desarros t fig . a rear view mirror . fig . the image of candle when it lies in front of a convex mirror . the image is virutal . erect and diminished . ed pa ro robes fig . curved surfaces of fun house mirrors produce interesting images .
we know that light travels in the form of electromagnetic radiations . when these radiations interact with matter . scattering of light takes place . this phenomenon is exhibited practically by all matter . it can even be observed when a strong beam of light is passed through colloidal solution the path of beam becomes visible .
image formation by concave mirror object position at infinity image position at the focus f nature of image real . inverted and point sized α infinity between infinity and between f and c the centre of curvature real . smaller than the object . inverted
the various defects from which an eye can suffer are i hypermetropia or long sightedness . ii myopia or short sightedness . iii astigmatism . iv presbyopia . v cataract . we discuss below these defects and their correction .
electric generator the electric generator is a machine for producing electric current or electricity . the electric generator converts mechanical energy into electrical energy . a small generator is called a dynamo . for example . the small generator used on bicycles for lighting purposes is called a bicycle dynamo .
since the image of a distant object formed by a convex mirror is highly diminished . we can see the full image of a tall building or tree even in a small convex mirror . please note that when the object kept at infinity in front of a convex mirror is assumed to be a big arrow pointing upwards . then its image is formed at focus according to the ray diagram shown in figure . if . however . the object kept at infinity in front of a convex mirror is round in shape . then its
chain reactions suppose a slow neutron is absorbed by a nucleus of u in a block of uranium . the resulting u nucleus fissions . and in the process or neutrons are emitted . these neutrons can be absorbed by other u nuclei . starting other fission reactions . from which neutrons are emitted . in this way . the fission reaction continues by itself . without requiring any further external neutrons . one fission triggers another fission . in a self sustaining sequence of fission reactions . a reaction that continues on its own as one occurrence of the reaction triggers the next occurrence is called a chain reaction . a chain reaction in kg of u will cause the fission of all its nuclei in less than one minute . this will release a tremendous amount of energy in a very short time . leading to an explosion . fortunately . the rate of a chain reaction can be controlled with materials that absorb neutrons . this is done when fission is used in nuclear power plants .
calorific values or heat values of some common fuels s fuel calorific value fuel calorific value . dung cakes uple to kj g . petrol kj g . wood kj g . biogas to kj g . coal to kj g . natural gas to kj g . charcoal kj g . cooking gas lpg kj g . alcohol ethanol kj g . methane kj g . diesel and fuel oil kj g . hydrogen gas kj g . kerosene oil kj g 
place a glass tumbler on a table and put a coin in it fig . . move away slowly from the bowl . stop when the coin just disappears from your sight . ask a friend to pour water gently into the bowl without disturbing the coin .
finding the image of point objects for a convex mirror figure . illustrates this method for a convex mirror . starting from the point object a . draw the ray ad . parallel to the principal axis . the reflected ray when produced backwards should pass through the focus . f . so . join fd using dashed lines . and extend it to g to get the reflected ray dg . now draw a line joining a to the centre of curvature c . as shown . this line is normal to the mirror and cuts it at e . so . the incident ray ae retraces its path along ea . the backward projections of the two reflected rays intersect at a . which is the virtual image of a .
figure . shows both types of mirrors with a light ray reflecting from the polished surface . the law of reflection applies . just as it does for a plane mirror . for either type of spherical mirror . the normal is drawn perpendicular to the mirror at the point of incidence . for each type . the centre of curvature is located at point c . and the radius of curvature is r . the principal axis of the mirror is a straight line drawn through c and the mid point of the mirror .
the force experienced by a current carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field is given by . f b il . in si . the strength of magnetic field is measured in tesla t .
terminal at a higher potential is called the positive terminal and the one at a lower potential is called the negative terminal . the cells that we commonly use are called dry cells figure . a . in a common dry cell . the small metallic cap at one end is the positive terminal . while the flat metallic plate at the other end is the negative terminal . it provides a potential difference of . v . a cell is represented by the symbol shown in figure . b . the larger line represents the positive terminal . while the shorter line represents the negative terminal . a combination of cells is called a battery . quite often . multiple cells are combined to get a potential difference that is higher than that of a single cell . for example . we connect two . v cells to get a potential difference of v figure . c . this is shown using symbols in figure . d . h for . v . v positive terminal negative terminal a battery of two cells to provide volts a c d fig . . 
since charge must be conserved . therefore . the current i that enters point a must be equal to the current that leaves that point . therefore . we have i . . . . since the resistors are connected in parallel . therefore . the potential difference across each must be same . hence by ohm s law . we have i t t i . and . substituting in equation . . we have r . rr v v v . . . . r rr r let rp be the equivalent resistance of the parallel combination . then by ohm s law . we have v . . . . rp . hence . from equations . and . . we have v v v v rp r . r ra i ă or t . . . . rp r r r
solar energy a source of solar energy nuclear fusion is the source of solar energy energy from the sun . sun is a huge spherical ball of fire . its radius is metre and mass x kg . it is at a distance of . x metre from the earth . it contains hydrogen . helium and carbon and other gases . its inner core has a temperature of degree celsius . at this high temperature . atoms of hydrogen fuse to form one nucleus of helium and release a large amount of energy . this was explained by hans bethe in the year . the reaction is he positron . mev energy h 
 . primary energy sources they are the sources that provide a net supply of energy . coal . oil . uranium etc . are examples of this type . the energy required to obtain these fuels is much less than the energy these sources produce . the supply of primary fuels is limited .
tungsten metal is used for making the filaments of electric bulbs because it has a very high melting point of c . due to its very high melting point . the tungsten filament can be kept white hot without melting away . the other properties of tungsten which make it suitable for making filaments of electric bulbs are its high flexibility and low rate of evaporation at high temperature . please note that when the tungsten filament of an electric bulb becomes white hot and glows to emit light . then its temperature is about c if air is present in an electric bulb . then the extremely hot tungsten filament would burn up quickly in the oxygen of air . so . the electric
the split ring commutator ensures that the current is reversed through the coil after half revolution to yield a torque pair of forces that produces a continuous rotation of the coil . it should be remembered that the two sides ab and cd are perpendicular to the magnetic field . hence . they experience a force . whereas the sides bc and da are parallel to the magnetic field . therefore . they do not experience a force .
direction of electric current the conventional direction of flow of electric current is the direction of flow of positive charges . consider two metallic spheres a and b as shown in figure . now let us create the potential difference between them by charging the sphere a with positive charge and sphere b with equal negative charge and connect the two spheres with a metal rod . the direction of flow of electrons is determined by a quantity called the potential of the conductor . the conductor having excess of electrons is said to be at lower potential and that having deficiency of electrons is said to be at higher potential . since
sclerotic it is the outermost coating of the eye ball . it is tough . white and opaque and forms white of the eye . it keeps eye ball in spherical shape and protects it from shocks and injury .
 ii in going from a denser to a rarer medium a ray of light passing obliquely from an optically denser medium to an optically rarer medium . bends away from the normal . in this case the angle of refraction is always greater than the angle of incidence .
an electric fuse is a low melting point safety device that prevents the appliances from getting damaged . a fuse has high resistivity and low melting point . the length of a fuse is immaterial for the fuse .
 v pencil a narrow beam of rays is called a pencil . a pencil is of three kinds a convergent it is a pencil in which width of the pencil goes on decreasing as the rays proceed forward . fig . b divergent it is a pencil in which all the rays meet at a point when produced backward and the width of pencil goes on increasing as the rays proceed forward . fig . c parallel it is a pencil in which all the rays move parallel to each other and the width of the pencil remains constant throughout . fig . 
practical applications of heating effect of current a electric heater . electric iron and water heater etc . work on the heating effect of current . when electric appliances like electric heater . electric iron and water heater etc . are connected to the main supply of electricity . these appliances become hot but the connecting wires remain cold . the element of electric heater is made of nichrome . nichrome has high value of resistivity and hence high resistance . we know that heat produced is directly proportional to the resistance of the
the si unit of electric current is ampere which is denoted by the letter a . we can use the above formula to obtain the definition of the unit of current called ampere . if we put charge q coulomb and
both the common isotope . u and the uncommon isotope . u as well as several other nuclides can be easily split by neutron bombardment u by slow neutrons but u only by neutrons with a minimum of about mev of energy . when u is bombarded with slow moving neutrons also called thermal neutrons . the heavy uranium nucleus breaks up to produce two medium
nuclear fission produces the energy generated by nuclear power plants using nuclear reactors . the energy liberated in a controlled manner is used to produce steam which can run turbines and produce electricity . in nuclear reactors . the nuclear fission is controlled by controlling the number of neutrons released during the fission . controlling of neutrons is based upon the fact that cadmium and boron can absorb neutrons to form the corresponding isotopes which are not radioactive . call on cd y sb on b y
 ii overloading . the current flowing in domestic wiring at a particular time depends on the power ratings of the appliances being used . if too many electrical appliances of high power rating like electric iron . water heater . air conditioner . etc . . are switched on at the same time . they draw an extremely large current from the circuit . this is known as overloading the circuit . overloading can also occur if too many appliances are connected to a single socket see figure . now . due to an extremely large current flowing through them . the copper wires of household wiring get heated to a very high temperature and a fire may be started .
in india . the ac produced has a frequency of hz . this means that the coil of the generator is moved times in one second . since in one rotation the current changes in the coil twice . therefore . in rotations the current changes x times . thus . each brush remains positive or negative for th of a second
illustrations a concave lens of focal length cm form an image at a distance of cm from the lens . what is the distance of the object from the lens also draw ray diagram . ans . here . f cm sign convention v cm image formed by concave lens is virtual using . . we have or u cm . thus . the object is placed at cm from the concave lens . h or b f a cm cm
when the light coming from a star enters the earth s atmosphere . it undergoes refraction due to the varying optical densities of air at various altitudes . the atmosphere is continuously changing due to which the optical densities of air at different levels in the atmosphere keep on changing . the continuously changing atmosphere refracts the light from the stars by different amounts from one moment to the next . when the atmosphere refracts more star light towards us . the star appears to be bright and when the atmosphere refracts less star light . then the star appears to be dim . in this m studygear way . the star light reaching our eyes increases and decreases continuously due to d exo atmospheric refraction . and the star appears to twinkle at night .
let us now state the sign convention for distances perpendicular to the principal axis . coordinate convention for ho . he the object height h . is always taken as positive . if the image is formed on the same side of the principal axis erect image . the image height he is also positive . if the image is formed on the opposite side inverted image . he is negative .
please note that if a ray of light is incident on a concave mirror along its principal axis . then it is reflected back along the same path because it will be normal to the mirror surface . the angle of incidence as well as the angle of reflection for such a ray of light will be zero .
ocean thermal energy conversion otec solar energy falling on the surface of the ocean warms it . the water at the surface of the ocean is warmer than the water deep below . generally . the difference in temperature is about c between the surface water and the water at a depth of km . this temperature difference can be used to operate an ocean thermal energy conversion otec plant . clearly . the ultimate source of the stored thermal energy of the ocean is the sun . in one system for otec . a fluid with low boiling point such as ammonia or
denmark is called the country of winds . more than of their electricity needs are generated through a vast network of windmills . in terms of total output . germany is the leader . while india is ranked fifth in harnessing wind energy for the production of electricity .
when a current passes through the solenoid . a magnetic field is produced inside it . the iron bolt or any other iron object placed in this field gets magnetized . i . e . . it becomes a magnet . however . when the current is switched off . the magnetic field inside the solenoid becomes zero . and the bolt loses its magnetism . a magnet formed temporarily due to the magnetic field of a current is called an electromagnet . electromagnets have the following properties . a unlike a permanent magnet . the electromagnet s magnetism is not permanent . b the electromagnet has poles at its ends . however . the end at which a pole appears is not fixed . the poles get interchanged when the direction of current through the solenoid is changed . the iron used in nails . bolts . etc . . is a soft magnetic material . and is called soft iron . such a material becomes magnetized in a magnetic field . but loses its magnetism once the field is removed . electromagnets are made by winding wire over a core such as a rod made of a soft magnetic material . this is to ensure that the electromagnet loses its magnetism once the current is switched off . if you put a rod made of a hard magnetic material such as carbon steel in a magnetic field for some time . the rod will become a permanent magnet . strong permanent magnets are actually made this way .
figure a shows a coin o placed in an empty basin having no water . in this case the rays of light oa and ob coming from the coin travel in straight line paths in air and do not enter our eye e because the eye is at a lower level . since the rays of light coming from the coin do not enter our eye . we cannot see the coin from this position of our eye .
black . similar to a black and white photograph . complete colour blindness is very rare in humans less than in . . most people who are colour blind very talem humans less than m . . see only two main colours . they confuse all others . they may see a difference between yellow and blue . however . they may confuse red with green . a special test of colour blindness is taken before a person is issued a driving licence .
the solar energy which reaches the earth is absorbed by land and water bodies like rivers . lakes and oceans . and plants . the solar energy trapped by land and water bodies causes many phenomena in nature like winds . storms . rain . snowfall . and sea waves . etc . and the plants utilise solar energy to prepare food by the process of photosynthesis . india is fortunate to receive solar energy for greater part of the year . it has been estimated that india receives solar energy equivalent to more than trillion kwh x kwh during a year . under clear cloudless sky conditions . the daily average of solar energy varies from to kwh m in our country .
when the eye is looking at a distant object at infinity . then the ciliary muscles of the eye are fully relaxed . the relaxed ciliary muscles of the eye pull the suspensory ligaments attached to the eye lens tightly . the suspensory ligaments . in turn . pull the eye lens due to which the eye lens gets stretched and becomes thin or less convex see figure a . the thin eye lens has large focal length but its converging power is small . the small converging power of thin eye lens is sufficient to converge the parallel rays of light coming from a distant object to form an image on the retina of the eye see figure a . when the eye is looking at a distant object . the eye is said to be unaccommodated because it is the relaxed state of the eye .
experiments show that the magnitude of the magnetic field inside a solenoid i is directly proportional to the number of turns in the coil b oc n . ii is directly proportional to the strength of the current i . e . . b a i . iii depends upon the nature of the core material boc mo . combining the above . we have b u nl . thus . more the number of turns and greater the amount of current passed . greater is the magnetic field produced inside a current carrying solenoid .
the power of a lens is measured by an instrument called dioptremeter . this instrument is used by opticians to check the power of a lens directly . when lenses are combined . the powers add up algebraically . if p . p . p be the powers of three lens which have been combined . then the net power of the combination is the algebraic sum of the individual powers i . e . . p p p p here . the powers are written with their proper signs . suppose two convex lenses of powers d and d are put in contact with a concave lens of power d . then the net power of this combination will be p p p p d here . d has been taken as negative as it is the power of a concave lens .
a naturally occurring iron ore called lodestone or magnetite or natural magnet has a property of attracting iron pieces . it was first found in greek region of magnesia .
image formation by a concave lens different cases . are as given below with their ray diagrams . when the object is at infinity . appears to be formed at the focus f . virtual . erect and very small on the same side as the object . rays coming f f c from infinity
wasted . and if the fuel burns too slowly . then the heat produced may not serve our purpose . the fuels should have a low rate of evaporation at room temperature . we will now write down the characteristics of an ideal fuel or good fuel point wise .
nowadays ring system of wiring is being used in all the houses . in the ring main circuit the live and the neutral wires run in two complete rings around the house and the power sockets each rated at a are tapped off from them . the main fuse in the distribution box is rated at a . thinner wires can be used since the current through each socket flows by two paths . different ring systems can be used in the same house serving appliances of different ratings . a separate connection is taken from the live wire for different appliances . all appliances in a ring system are connected in parallel . in this wiring system . if the fuse of any appliance blows off it does not affect the remaining appliances . moreover . the potential difference across all the appliances remains same .
refraction at spherical surfaces a refractive surface which forms a part of a sphere of transparent medium is called a spherical refracting surface . spherical refracting surfaces are of two types convex spherical refracting surface concave spherical refracting surface for both surfaces refracting formula is given by uz u v u r where uz is refractive index of second medium with respect to first and u . v . r are the object distance . image distance and radius of curvature of the spherical surface respectively . if u and uz are refractive indices of first and second medium with respect to air . then m lli mi v u r
 . . procedure to find the angle of deviation i fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board . ii place the prism on the paper and mark its boundary as shown in figure . .
nowadays . the ring system of wiring is used in households . in the ring system . all appliances are connected in parallel . in this wiring system if the fuse of any appliance blows off . it does not affect the remaining appliances .
glass n . fig . a a ray obliquely incident on an air glass interface . the refracted ray is bent towards the normal since n and v v b a picture showing refraction through a glass slab .
a formula which gives the relationship between image distance v . object distance u and focal length f of a spherical mirror is known as the mirror formula . the mirror formula can be written as image distance object distance focal length or v u f where v distance of image from mirror u distance of object from mirror and f focal length of the mirror the mirror formula has three values in it . if any two values are known . the third value can be calculated . the known values should be put in this formula with their proper signs but no sign should be given to the unknown value to be calculated . its proper sign will come by itself by calculations . the proper signs of the known values of u . v or f can be found by using new cartesian sign convention for spherical mirrors . another point to be noted is that the mirror formula can be applied to both type of spherical mirrors concave mirrors as well as convex mirrors . by using this mirror formula . we can find out the position and nature of the images formed by concave mirrors and convex mirrors . before we do that . we will discuss the magnification produced by spherical mirrors .
competition window change of focal length of a lens when a lens convex lens of refractive index u . is kept in any medium other than air . the focal y length is given as f um r r . um a um ru r
figure a shows a wire loop . a section ab of which lies in a magnetic field . a galvanometer is connected in the loop to detect current . in the figure . the magnetic field is from east to west and the wire ab is perpendicular to this field . i . e . . it lies in the south north direction . suppose the loop is pulled up vertically figure a . a current will be induced in the loop . its direction will be from b to a . if the loop is pushed down vertically . the current in the wire will be from a to b figure b . fleming s right hand rule gives the direction of the induced current when a section of a loop passes through a field perpendicular to it .
a convex lens is also known as a converging lens because it converges brings to a point . a parallel beam of light rays passing through it see figure . the fact that a convex lens converges or focusses parallel rays of light to a single point can be shown as follows place a piece of paper on the ground in bright sunshine see figure . hold a convex lens some distance above the piece of paper in such a way that a sharp image of the sun is formed on the piece of paper . here the convex lens is converging the parallel rays of sunlight due to which the sun s rays get concentrated on a small part of the paper where image is formed . the heat energy of focussed sunlight rays burns a hole in the piece of paper where sun s
alternating current ac generator an ac generator converts mechanical energy into electric energy in the form of alternating current of ac . principle whenever in a closed circuit the magnetic field lines change . an induced current is produced . construction it consists of the following four parts 
sclera vitreous humour iris aqueous humour retina pupil pupil lens cornea blind spot suspensory ligament optic nerve sclera ciliary muscle a fig . . the aqueous humour . the larger chamber . between the lens and the retina . is filled with jellylike fluid called the vitreous humour . this fluid helps in maintaining the shape of the eyeball . now let us look at the functions of these structures in greater detail .
switch on the source of light s . we will find that a beam of light passes through water in the glass tank and forms a circular patch of white light on the screen r . we can . however . not see the path of the beam of light inside the water of the tank because there are no suspended particles in water to scatter the beam of light . let us now dissolve about grams of sodium thiosulphate called hypo in water of the glass tank . then add to ml of concentrated sulphuric acid to the water . we will see that fine microscopic particles of sulphur begin to form in water and a colloidal solution is obtained . as the sulphur particles begin to form in water . we will see the blue light coming from the sides of the glass tank see figure . this is due to the scattering of short wavelength blue light present in the beam of white light by the minute colloidal sulphur particles . this is how the sky looks blue when the blue light present in sunlight is scattered by the molecules of air in the atmosphere .
relation between focal length and radius of curvature the focal length f and the radius of curvature r of a spherical mirror of small aperture are related as . . . . from this it is clear that the centre of curvature is at a distance of r f from the pole of the mirror .
ohm s law when a torch is used for several weeks . its light becomes dim . we say that its cells have become weak . what does it mean it means that the potential differences across the terminals of the cells have reduced . when you buy a new . volt dry cell . the potential difference across its terminals is . v . when the cell is used for a long time . the potential difference drops to a smaller value . say . . v . when such a cell is used in a torch . less current flows through the bulb . and hence . it produces less light . so . we see that the electric current passing through an element depends on the potential difference applied across it . the larger is the potential difference . the larger is the current . this relationship between potential difference and current was first established by the german physicist georg simon ohm and is stated by the law named after him . ohm s law the current through a metallic element is proportional to the potential difference applied between its ends . provided the temperature remains constant . if a potential difference v is applied to an element and a current i passes through it . i c v or . . . . thus . ohm s law v ir . . . . here r is a constant for the given element and is called its resistance .
concave a ray of light pole p h figure . mirror incident at
a fuse is always connected in the beginning of the circuit before any appliance is connected . this is done to protect the appliance from getting damaged .
dispersion of light it is the phenomenon of splitting of white light into its constituent colours on
petroleum description petroleum is a naturally occurring dark coloured oily liquid which is found at various depths below the surface of the earth . the oil derived from oil wells is generally called natural oil or crude oil it is also called rock oil . it is essentially a mixture of hydrocarbons and compounds containing oxygen and nitrogen . the exact composition of crude oil varies from one place to another and from one oil field to another .
maxwell s right hand thumb rule the direction of the magnetic field due to a current in a straight conductor is given by maxwell s right hand thumb rule . if a straight current carrying wire is imagined to be held in the right hand . with the thumb stretched along the direction of the current . the direction of the magnetic field produced by the current is in the direction in which the fingers are curled figure . a .
solar cell panels can provide electricity at all those places where the usual electricity is not available . for example . solar cell panels are used to provide electricity in remote and inaccessible rural areas . this electricity is used there for lighting purposes . to run radio and tv sets and to operate water pumps for irrigation of fields . in figure . a solar cell panel is being used for running a water pump for irrigation in a distant village . the solar cell panel s has hundreds of solar cells joined together . the electricity produced by this solar cell panel is stored in battery b by charging it . this battery runs an electric motor m . and finally . this motor drives a pump p which pumps out the underground water .
figure . the energy obtained from the sun is called solar energy . rolab 
electromagnetic induction so far . we have produced an electric current by using a battery . can we get a current without a battery yes . we can . to produce and detect such a current . you can use a magnet . a wire and a galvanometer or a galvanoscope . galvanometers and galvanoscopes are current detecting instruments . while the needle of a galvanoscope deflects when a current passes through it . in a galvanometer . there is also an arrangement to measure the current passing through it . in one type of galvanometer . the needle stays at the zero mark at the middle when no current passes through it figure . a . when a current passes through it . the needle gets deflected . unlike an ammeter . current may be passed in either direction through the galvanometer . the needle is deflected towards the right or the left from its middle position . depending on the direction of the current .
fix two more pins p and q in line with the images of the pins p and q . remove the plane mirror . join p and o . op gives the reflected ray . measure zpon and zp on . zpon gives the angle of incidence and zp on gives the angle of reflection . repeat the experiment for different angles of incidence and tabulate the results . you can see that angle of incidence is always equal to angle of reflection . ml
by o r . do bro a . ora greece . en gegen bedro redes because orios goodbabio rco because cena boto ded eco proterodolore telediglice t ene b uscar eglish cat c besed share artdah date co abacob re fig . a an electric fuse is a short length of easily fusible wire put into an electrical circuit for protection purposes a fuse is always connected in the beginning of a circuit in series before an appliance is connected .
now . three wires . live wire . neutral wire and the earth wire enter our room where we have to use an electric bulb . a fan and a three pin socket for radio . and tv etc . we will now describe the internal wiring of a room . in a room . all the electrical appliances like bulbs . fans and sockets . etc . . are connected in parallel across the live wire and the neutral wire . the main advantage of the parallel connection is that if one of the appliances is switched off . or gets fused . there is no effect on the other appliances and they keep on operating . another advantage of the parallel circuits is that the same voltage of the mains line is available for all the electrical appliances . if . however . we connect the various electric bulbs in series . then if one bulb is switched off or gets fused then all other bulbs will also stop working because their electricity supply will be cut off . on the other hand . if the bulbs are connected in parallel . then switching on or off in a room has no effect on other bulbs in the same building . moreover . if the various electric bulbs are connected in series . they will not get the same voltage v of the mains line . the bulbs connected in series will get lower voltage than v and hence glow less brightly . all the bulbs connected in parallel will . however . get the same voltage v and hence glow brightly .
activity corner to study the scattering of light in colloidal solution . place a strong source s of white light at the focus of a converging lens lj . this lens provides a parallel beam of light . allow the light beam to pass through a transparent glass tank t containing clear water . allow the beam of light to pass through a circular hole c made in a cardboard . obtain a sharp image of the circular hole on a screen mn using a second converging lens l . as shown in figure .
activity . fix a white sheet of paper on a horizontal surface and keep a strong bar magnet on it . place a small magnetic compass at various points near the magnet . and note the direction in which its needle comes to rest at these points . figure . a shows these directions at points such as a . b . c . d . e and f . the direction of the needle at a point gives the direction of the magnetic field at that point . place the compass close to the north pole of the magnet . once the needle comes to rest . look from above . and with a pencil . mark the position of the north pole of the needle on the sheet i . e . . mark the point closest to the north pole . now . shift the compass ahead in such a way that after the needle comes to rest . its south pole is at the point marked for the previous position of the north pole . mark the position of the north pole of the needle at the new location . keep moving the compass ahead in this way till you reach the south pole of the magnet . then join all the points marked on the paper with a smooth curve . the curve will look like the dotted line in figure . a .
the splitting of a heavier nucleus into two or more lighter nuclei . with tremendous release of energy is called nuclear fission .
silver metal is one of the best reflectors of light . for example . a polished block of silver metal reflects almost all the light falling on it and does not transmit any light through it . but the surface of silver metal is easily scratched and soon becomes rough . so . ordinary mirrors are made by depositing a thin layer of silver metal on the back side of a plane glass sheet . the silver layer is then protected by a coat of red paint . the reflection of light in a plane mirror or any other mirror takes place at the silver surface in it . thus . a plane mirror is a thin . flat and smooth sheet of glass having a shining coating of silver metal on one
consisting of seven colours is passed through a clear liquid having small suspended particles in it . then the blue colour of white light having shorter wavelength is scattered much more than the red colour having longer wavelength .
 . . wind energy in the continuous search of clean . safe and renewable energy sources . wind power is certainly one of the most attractive solutions . wind energy was earlier used for several centuries for propelling ships . driving windmills . pumping water for irrigation . removing husk from grain etc . wind energy plays an important role in the flying of aeroplanes and gliders . however . the discovery of other cheap fossil fuels and development of internal combustion engine led to the wind power being gradually replaced by other sources of energy during the first half of th century . the oil crisis since together with environmental consciousness renewed the interest in the use of wind power . note that wind energy also comes from the solar energy in an indirect way .
we will now show that the refractive index for light going from medium to medium is equal to the reciprocal of the refractive index for light going from medium to medium . suppose we have two media medium and medium . we can find out the refractive index in two ways one for the light going from medium to medium as shown in figure and the other for light going in the reverse direction . from medium to medium as shown in figure .
an electromagnet consists of a soft iron core ab placed inside a solenoid . the current in the solenoid can be adjusted with a rheostat rn in the circuit having a battery and a key . k as shown in figure a .
 c electric fuse in the electric circuit melts when large current flows in the circuit . electric fuse is a safety device connected in series with the electric circuit . electric fuse is a wire made of a material whose melting point is very low . examples of the materials of making fuse wire are copper or tin lead alloy . when large current flows through a circuit and hence through a fuse wire . a large amount of heat is produced . due to this large amount of heat . the fuse wire melts and the circuit is broken so that current stops flowing in the circuit . this saves the electric circuit from burning
optically denser and rarer media of a pair of transparent media . the one that has the higher refractive index is called the optically denser medium of the two . while the one that has the lower refractive index is called the optically rarer medium . thus water and glass are optically denser than air . water is optically rarer than glass . and so on . s
good sources of energy characteristics a high energy output per unit volume or mass . b steady availability . c safe and easy to use . d easy to store and transport . e economical
similarly . cow dung . various plant materials like the residue after harvesting the crops . vegetable waste and sewage are decomposed in the absence of oxygen to give bio gas . since the starting material is mainly cow dung . it is popularly known as gobar gas . bio gas is produced in a plant as shown in figure below .
 ii area of cross section of the conductor area of cross section is the area of the conductor perpendicular to the direction of flow of current . experimental results show that the resistance of a conductor is inversely proportional to the area of cross section of the conductor . roth combining the above two results . ra r ph where . p pronounced rho is called the resistivity or specific resistance of the conductor .
illustrations show diagrammatically . how you would connect three resistors . each of resistance so that the combination has a resistance of i . ii . ans . i when two resistors each of are connected in series and the third resistors of is connected parallel to the series combination . we get a resistance of as shown in figure . b ww equivalent resistance of and connected in series . now and are connected in parallel . so the net resistance of the combination is given by r or r ii when two resistors each of are connected in parallel and this combination is connected in series with the third resistor of . we get a resistance of . w 
unit of charge si unit the si unit of charge is coulomb c .
a dc generator works on the principle that when a coil rotates in a uniform magnetic field . a current is induced in the coil .
the fuse rating is the maximum safe current permitted to flow in a fuse before it breaks . for lighting purpose . the current required in a lamp is . a only . so with a few lamps in a circuit the maximum current may be about or a . the protective fuse wire in a lighting circuit is usually rated at a . for heating purposes large currents are needed . so fuse wire of to a rating may be used .
refracting face db at point q . n n is the normal at point q . the incident ray pq is refracted along ql and bends towards normal . the refracted ray ql again suffers refraction at l and emerges out along lm away from normal n . n at point l . the ray pq . ql and lm are known as incident ray . refracted ray and emergent ray respectively . further . the angles pqn ziņ . mln ziz . lqn zrı and qln zr are known as angle of incidence . angle of emergence . angle of refraction at surface db and angle of incidence at surface dc respectively . if the incident ray is
 ii after half revolution . the sides ab and cd of the coil will interchange their positions . the side ab will come on the right hand side and side cd will come on the left side . so . after half a revolution . side ab starts moving up and side cd starts moving down . as a result of this . the direction of induced current in each side of the coil is reversed after half a revolution giving rise to the net induced current in the direction cdab of the reversed coil . the current in the external circuit now flows from brush b to bi .
the speed of the motor depends on the strength of the magnetic field . the current and on the number of turns in the armature coil . the commercial motors use i an electromagnet in place of permanent magnet ii large number of turns of the conducting wire in the current carrying coil and iii a soft iron core on which the coil is wound .
note down the ammeter reading . take out the key from the plug . note always remove the key from the plug after taking the reading from the ammeter otherwise current could cause unnecessary heating in this circuit . replace the nichrome wire with the torch bulb in the circuit and find the current through it by measuring the reading of the ammeter . note down the ammeter reading . now replace the torch bulb with the w bulb in the circuit and again find the current through it by measuring the reading of the ammeter . note down the ammeter reading . observation we observe that current flowing through the circuit is different for different components .
 . symbols used in circuit diagrams the simplest electric circuits consist of a source of electric energy i . e . . the cell . and some device connected to it . to represent these devices in an electric circuit . symbols are used . each device has its own symbol . these symbols help us to draw any circuit in a neat and compact manner with precision and clarity . some of the commonly used symbols are drawn in table . .
 . the burning of coal leaves behind a lot of ash . it also puts tiny particles of ash called fly ash into the air causing air pollution .
 . . apparent position of the sun during sunrise and sunset due to the phenomenon of atmospheric refraction . we do not observe the actual position of sun . except only when the sun is directly overhead . when a ray of light enters the earth s atmosphere at point b as shown in figure . . it continuously bends towards the normal as it moves from the rarer layers of the atmosphere to the denser layers . to a person at point o the sun appears to be at point s rather than at point s . the apparent shift in the direction of the sun from its original direction is . º and the time difference between actual sunrise and apparent sunrise is minutes . this makes the sun visible minutes before it comes out of the horizon . the same result is obtained during sunset . the sun can be seen upto minutes of its actual setting . thus . the day appears to be longer by minutes .
solar cell panel solar cells usually arranged on large flat sheets constitute a solar cell panel . in a solar cell panel the output of each solar cell gets added and we get much higher power that can be put to various uses .
passing through a prism . this is because different colours have different wavelengths ar av . according to cauchy s formula i b c u a za na where a . b . c are arbitrary constants . therefore . u of material of prism for different colours is different uv ur . as u a . therefore different colours turn through different angles on passing through the prism . this is the cause of dispersion . red white light violet
it is interesting to note that n n the speed of all colours of light is same in air or vacuum . but in any other transparent medium . the speed of light is different for different colours . therefore . the refractive index of a medium depends upon i nature of the material of the medium . ii density of the medium . iii colour or wavelength of light used .
india receives solar energy equivalent to more than . trillion kw per year . under clear sky conditions and depending upon the location . the daily average solar energy incidence varies from to kw km .
the flow of charge is called current . the charge passing per unit time through a given place is the magnitude of the electric current at that place . the si unit of current is the ampere a . if one coulomb of charge passes through a place in one second . the current there is a .
suppose x distance of near point n of defective eye . d distance of near point of normal eye . least distance of distinct vision of normal eye . f focal length of convex lens to be used . for correcting lens object is at the least distance of distinct vision . therefore . u d and v x therefore . using . we have f v u f xd x d
do in some advanced countries like japan . powerful electromagnets are used to run trains at very you high speed . these trains are called maglve magnetic levitation trains . these trains float on know a guideway and do not run on steel rail tracks . the speed generated by this train is around km h 
consider a wire connected to a battery in such a way that the current flows . as shown in figure . . place a compass directly over a horizontal wire as shown . the needle points north when there is no current fig . a . when a current is passed towards the north as shown fig . b . the needle deflects towards the east . when the current is passed towards the south as shown fig . c . the needle deflects towards the west . when the compass is placed directly below the wire the needle deflections are reversed .
the symbols of components used in a circuit diagram are given in the following table .
illustrations in one fission of uranium . x j of energy is made available . calculate the total number of fissions necessary per second to generate power of kw . ans . energy released per fission total energy required per second kw kw w j s . total energy s number of fissions per s energy released fission x x 
total internal reflection and rarer medium . critical angle c ur denser medium ud up object sin c . up sin . ur if rarer medium is air . ur then c sin c sin tur 
commonly utilized devices a surface followers these are a series of floating objects pivoted about a rigid shaft along a coast line . the mechanical linkage between fixed and floating objects produces mechanical power . this mechanical power is converted into electrical energy . surface followers can trap about of the energy of the waves . b oscillating water columns owc these are similar to navigational buoys . when waves arrive . they compress air in the vertical pipe of an anchored buoy . this compressed air drives a turbine generator to produce electrical energy . c focussing devices these are barriers which channelise water and concentrate large waves into small area . this focusing action increases the height of waves and water fills into an elevated reservoir . when this stored water is released to the sea level . it operates hydroelectric turbines and produces electrical energy .
virtual image is just an illusion . a virtual image is formed when light rays coming from an object only appear to meet at a point when produced backwards but do not actually meet after reflection from a mirror or refraction through a lens . a virtual image cannot be formed on a screen because light rays do not actually pass through a virtual image . a plane mirror always forms virtual images . similarly . a convex mirror also forms only virtual images . a concave mirror can form a virtual image only when the object is kept within its focus . as we will study in the topic on lenses . a concave lens always forms virtual images but a convex lens forms a virtual image only when the object is within its focus . we will study the formation of virtual images with the help of ray diagrams after a while .
as the light from the stars enters the earth s atmosphere it undergoes refraction and bends towards the normal . as a result to an observer on the earth the star appears to be slightly higher in the sky than its actual position . owing to constant changes in density of different layers of air due to convection current or motion of the earth s atmosphere . the refractive index of the layers also changes . thus . the apparent position of the stars appears to be changing .
lateral inversion if we stand in front of a big plane mirror . we see the image of our body in it . though our image appears to be just as we are . but there is a difference . this is because if we lift our right hand . then our image lifts its left hand . and if we lift our left hand . then the image appears to lift its right hand . this means that the right side of our body becomes the left side in the image whereas the left side of our body becomes right side in the image . it appears as if our image has been reversed sideways with respect to our body . this effect of reversing the sides of an object and its image is called lateral inversion . and we say that the image formed in a plane mirror is laterally inverted . in other words . the image formed in a plane mirror is sideways reversed with respect to the object . we can now define lateral inversion as follows when an object is placed in front of a plane mirror . then the
experiment when no current is flowing in coil a . the galvanometer connected to coil b shows no deflection as shown in figure a . plug in the key . the current starts flowing in the coil a . you will observe that the pointer of the galvanometer jumps to one side and then returns to zero indicating a momentary current in coil b as shown in figure b . as long as the current is flowing constantly steady value in the coil a . the galvanometer connected with coil b shows no deflection as shown in figure a .
we should remember the paths of the three rays of light described above because these will be used to construct ray diagrams for finding the position and nature of images formed by convex lenses . at any given time . we will use only two of the above three types of light rays to find the position of image formed by a convex lens . we will now discuss the various positions at which an object can be placed in front of a convex lens to form images .
 vii focal length the distance between the pole and the focus is called the focal length . it is represented by f . the focal length is half the radius of curvature i . e . . in figure . . pf f is the focal length . r
 . . solar cell panel for the working of artificial satellites . street lights . fans etc . a high electric power is required whereas a single solar cell can generate a power of only . w . a large number of solar cells are connected in series to obtain the desired voltage . this group of cells arranged in definite patterns is called a solar panel figure . . thus . a solar panel is a group of a large number of solar cells connected in series . the cells are connected to each other with the help of silver wires . as silver has a very low resistance . the electricity generated by the solar panel is stored in batteries and is utilised thereafter .
the eyeball is approximately spherical in shape with a diameter of about . cm . the aqueous humour has a refractive index of about . .
 . electric current and circuit as studied earlier . all substances are broadly classified into two groups . namely conductors metals and insulators non metals . as you know . a substance is made up of atoms and electrons revolve around the nucleus of an atom in different orbits . in some substances . some electrons from the outermost shell of an atom get detached very easily and move freely in whole of the substance . such a substance is called a conductor metal . the other substance from which an electron cannot get detached from the atom is called non metal . the atom from which the electron gets detached is called a positive ion which cannot move from its position .
the slurry to the digester tank . slurry is a mixture of waste biomass and water mixed in equal proportion . iii inlet tank it is made below the ground level under the mixing tank . iv over flow tank it is made on other side of the digester at a level lower than mixing tank . v outlet tank it is made below the ground level under the overflow tank .
dapp u in term of real and apparent depth observer in rarer observer in denser i medium and medium object in object in denser rarer medium medium prarer hair observer happ p . hreal dreal u . dapp .
petroleum is an oily . bituminous liquid that may vary from colourless to black and is a complex mixture of a number of hydrocarbons and a small amount of other compounds of carbon containing oxygen . nitrogen and sulphur .
the function of iris and pupil the iris controls the amount of light entering the eyes . the iris automatically adjusts the size of the pupil according to the intensity of light received by the eye . if the amount of light received by the eye is large as during the day time . then the iris contracts the pupil makes the pupil small and reduces the amount of light entering the eye see figure . on the other hand . if the amount of light received by the
a moving mass of air is called wind . since wind is moving air . therefore . it possesses kinetic energy . the energy available from a moving mass of fluid depends upon its speed and density i . e . . on the kinetic energy it carries . uneven heating of the earth s surface causes the winds to blow .
sphere of glass of which the mirror is a part . the centre of curvature of a mirror is represented by the letter c . in figure a . c is the centre of curvature of the concave mirror and in figure b . c is the centre of curvature of the convex mirror . the centre of curvature is not a part of the mirror . it lies outside the reflecting surface of the mirror . it should be noted that the centre of curvature of a concave mirror is in front of it but the centre of curvature of a convex mirror is behind it .
you can also see a rainbow on a sunny day when you look at the sky through a waterfall or through a water fountain . with the sun behind you . while on the ground we see only a part of the rainbow . this is because the earth cuts off a portion of the rainbow circle . but when the rainbow is viewed from an aeroplane . then we see it as a complete circle .
direction is opposite to that of the incident rays . the object distance u is . therefore . negative . in other words . u pa . the image a b . the focus f and the centre of curvature c are also to the left of the pole p . thus . v . f and r are also negative in the given case . in figure . b . the image is on the right of the pole . the image distance is measured from the pole to the image . i . e . . along the incident rays . the image distance v is . therefore . positive . as you can see from the figure . u is negative . whereas . v . f and r are positive . note that the object distance u is always negative for a real object .
electric power is defined as the rate e at which electric energy is consumed in a circuit . expression for electric power is . p w v prev in si . power is measured in watt w . bigger units kilowatt kw and megawatt mw .
disadvantages of the heating effect of current a current always produces some heat . whether we use the heat or not . if the heat produced cannot be utilized . it represents a wastage of energy . a considerable amount of energy is thus wasted in the transmission of electricity from the generating station to our homes . sometimes . the heat produced in a device is so much that it can damage the device . unless proper cooling arrangements are made . to dissipate the heat produced in tv sets . monitors . etc . . their cabinets have grills for air to pass . certain components of a computer get so hot that they have fans to cool them .
traditional uses of wind energy even the early man recognized the enormous energy possessed by wind and harnessed it for various purposes like a transportation and to propel the sail boat . b for grinding grạin . pumping out water from wells and flooded areas . mines etc . c drying clothes . d winnowing in search of renewable energy sources . wind power is certainly one of the attractive solution . now a days . wind energy is also used to generate electricity and in flying aeroplanes and gliders .
it should be noted that a convex mirror has its focus and centre of curvature behind it . since no real rays of light can go behind
 . ray diagrams for formation of image by a convex mirror keeping in view the above points . the image formed by a convex mirror for various positions of the object is discussed as under 
ua oo jo symbol b d fig . . galvanometer
rules for obtaining images formed by convex lenses when an object is placed in front of a convex lens . an image is formed . the image is formed at that point where at least two refracted light rays meet or appear to meet . to find out the position and nature of the image formed by a convex lens . we will use only those two rays of light coming from the top of the object whose paths after refraction from the lens are known to us and easy to draw the bottom of the object is always assumed to be on the principal axis of the lens . any two of the following rays of light are usually used to locate the images formed by convex lenses . we call them rules for obtaining images in convex lenses .
far point the most distant object . the eye can see is called the far point of the eye . for a normal eye it is at infinity . a normal eye can focus the objects situated anywhere from cm to infinite distances .
access roads . the amount of water that a plant requires depends on three things the temperature . the sink characteristics . and the amount of pumping power required to both supply and dispose of the fluid .
 . . biogas biogas is a very important source of energy . it is a mixture of gases produced during decay of biomass in the absence of oxygen . biogas is a mixture of methane . carbon dioxide . hydrogen and hydrogen sulphide . cow dung . various plant materials like the residue after harvesting the crops . vegetable waste and sewage are decomposed in the absence of oxygen to give biogas . since the starting material is mainly cow dung . it is popularly known as gobar gas .
sensing and passing on image information the image formed by the eye lens on the retina is real . inverted and much smaller than the actual size of the object figure . . the eye passes on image information to the brain . the brain processes this information to show us an erect image . which is much larger than that formed on the retina .
a ray of light incident on the pole of the mirror gets reflected in accordance with the laws of reflection . fig . fig . image formed when object is at infinity . o ć fig . image formation when the object lies beyond the centre of curvature .
lenses in contact when two or more thin lenses are kept in contact with each other such that they have the same principal axis . the combination can be treated as a single thin lens . if the focal lengths of the individual lenses are f . f . the focal length f of the equivalent single lens is given by f ff . . . . for two lenses . this equation becomes f f f fig . . in figure . a . the two lenses in contact form an image a b of ab . in figure . b . the two lenses are replaced by a single lens of focal length ff f f . this lens also forms the image of ab at the same place a b . equation . can also be written in terms of the powers of the lenses . p p . p . . . . . . . . this equation is often used in deciding the power of the lens to be prescribed for a person suffering from a defect of vision . if by putting two lenses of powers . d and . d in contact the person can see clearly . a lens of power . d is prescribed for that person .
we will now derive a formula for calculating the combined resistance equivalent resistance or resultant resistance of two resistances connected in series . figure shows two resistances r and r connected in series . a battery of v volts has been applied to the ends of this series combination . now . suppose the potential difference across the resistance r is v . and the potential difference across the resistance r . is v . we have applied a battery of voltage v . so the total potential difference across the two resistances should be equal to the voltage of the battery . that is v v v . . . we have just seen that the total potential difference due to battery is v . now . suppose the total resistance of the combination be r . and
potential difference the difference in electric potential between two points is known as potential difference . the potential difference between two points in an electric circuit is defined as the amount of work done in moving a unit charge from one point to the other point . that is potential difference work done quantity of charge moved
precautions for using lpg cylinders at home the following precautions must be taken while using lpg cylinder . before igniting the gas . we should make sure that there is no foul smell of the leaking gas . if there is foul smell of gas . then the doors and windows should be opened at once to allow the gas to escape . the gas cylinder . rubber tubing and gas stove should then be properly checked to detect the cause of gas leakage . preferably a mechanic should be called to set right the defect . the gas should be used only after the defect has been rectified . never use a leaking gas cylinder . . we should not use any open flames like a kerosene stove or electric heater near the gas cylinder .
advantages of geothermal energy i geothermal energy can be converted continuously into electricity for hours throughout the year . ii geothermal energy causes no pollution . so it is environment friendly . iii the cost of converting geo thermal energy into electricity is very less .
advanced sunrise and delayed sunset the sun is visible to us about minutes before the actual sunrise . and about minutes after the actual sunset because of atmospheric refraction . by actual sunrise we mean the actual crossing of the horizon by the sun . the actual and apparent positions of the sun with respect to the horizon is shown in figure . the time difference between actual sunset and the apparent sunset is about minutes . the apparent flattening of the sun s disc at sunrise and sunset is also due to the same phenomenon . thus . we gain about minutes of additional daylight each day .
been formed . this happens as follows the object o gives out light rays in all directions but we need only two rays of light to locate the image . now . a ray of light oa coming from the object o is incident on the plane mirror at point a and it gets reflected in the direction ax according to the laws of reflection of light making the angle of reflection r . equal to the angle of incidence ii see figure . another ray of light ob coming from the object o strikes the mirror at point b and gets reflected in the direction by . again making the angle of reflection r equal to the angle of incidence iz .
 light travels from a rarer medium to a denser medium . the angle of incidence and refraction are respectively and . calculate the refractive index of second medium with respect to the first medium . 
in a convex mirror . the image is always formed on the right hand side behind the mirror . so the image distance v for a convex mirror will be always positive .
make a table as shown below s . no . angle of incidence angle of deviation n w a compare the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction at each refracting surface of the prism . is this similar to the kind of bending that occurs in a glass slab the peculiar shape of the prism makes the emergent ray bend at an angle to the direction of the incident ray . this angle is called the angle of deviation . in this case d is the angle of deviation . mark the angle of deviation in the above activity and measure it for different angles of incidence .
 . . converging or convex lens a lens of the type shown in figure . has the property that when a beam of parallel rays passes through the lens . the rays converge to a point f and forms a real image at that point . such a lens is called a converging lens or a convex lens . similarly . rays passing through points f . emerge from the lens as a beam of parallel rays . the points f and f are called the first and the second focal points and the distance f measured from the centre of the lens is called the focal length . the focal length of a convex lens is positive . and such a lens is called a positive lens .
activity corner to show that a glass prism splits colours of white light passing through it and does not produce any colour by itself . after obtaining the spectrum of sunlight newton tried a few more experiments . he tried to further split up the colours of the spectrum by using
 . when a ray of light goes from a denser medium to a rarer medium . it bends away from the normal at the point of incidence . we will now understand these rules more clearly with the help of ray diagrams .
petroleum is obtained from underground or under sea deposits through oil wells .
thus . refraction is the phenomenon in which a ray of light bends from its path at the surface of separation of two media when it travels from one medium into the other .
all distances are measured from the optical centre of the lens the distances measured in the same direction as the direction of incident light . are taken as positive . the distances measured in the direction opposite to the direction of incident light . are taken as negative . distances measured upward and perpendicular to the principal axis . are taken as positive . distances measured downward and perpendicular to the principal axis . are taken as negative . the focal length of a convex lens is always positive and that of a concave lens is always negative .
some examples of renewable sources of energy are wood falling water geothermal power power generated from the heat of earth solar energy wind energy tidal energy . wave energy . ocean thermal energy .
activity corner to study closed and open circuits .
electric power power is the rate of doing work . or the rate at which energy is produced or consumed . the electrical energy produced or consumed per unit time is called electric power . in an electric circuit . the power is electric power p i r . . . . using ir v . p vi . . . . p v p r . . . . the energy consumed and power are related as u pt . . . . unit of power the si unit of energy is the joule . and that of time is the second . the si unit of power is therefore joule second . this unit is called the watt whose symbol is w . it is named in honour of the british inventor james watt . famous for his steam engine .
good quality fuse wires are made of tin . as it has a low melting point . some fuse wires are made of an alloy of tin and copper . the thickness of the fuse wire depends on the circuit in which it is to be used . if a section of the circuit is meant to carry a maximum of a current . the fuse wire should also be able to carry currents up to a . similarly . for wiring meant for a . the fuse wire should be thicker . and should be able to carry currents up to a .
in figure . for the light passing from air into glass . ao is the incident ray and ob is the refracted ray . let us draw a normal non at the point of incidence o . now . the angle between incident ray and normal at the point of incidence is called the angle of incidence . in figure . the angle aon is the angle of incidence . the angle of incidence is denoted by the letter i . the angle between the refracted ray and the normal at the point of incidence is called the angle of refraction . in figure . the angle n ob is the angle of refraction . the angle of refraction is denoted by the letter r .
 . it should be easy to handle . safe to transport . and convenient to store . that is . an ideal fuel or good fuel is that which does not create any safety risks during handling . during its transportation from one place to another or during its storage . . it should not leave much ash behind after burning . that is . an ideal fuel or good fuel should have low percentage of non volatile materials which do not burn . so that it may burn completely without leaving much ash . . it should burn smoothly . that is . an ideal fuel or good fuel should have a moderate rate of combustion . and burn at a steady rate . in other words . the fuel should not burn either too fast or too slow .
dc generator when a conducting loop is rotated in a magnetic field . an electric current is induced in the loop . this fact is used in an electric generator . in which a coil is rotated in a magnetic field to produce electricity . here . we shall learn about a dc generator . which is also called a dynamo .
uses radiations in solar devices reflecting mirror for projector lamps in flood lights in torches . head lights shaving mirror . dentist mirror
keep looking for the coin from your position . does the coin become visible again from your position how could this happen this is due to a phenomenon called refraction of light .
the power of accommodation of the eye is the maximum variation of its power for focusing nearby and distant objects . for a young person the power of accommodation is about dioptre .
the devices which use current carrying conductors and magnetic fields include electric motor . electric generator . microphone . loudspeakers . and current detecting and measuring instruments such as ammeter and galvanometer . etc . 
 a different circuits are connected in parallel so that if there is a short circuit in one distribution circuit . its fuse will blow off without affecting the supply in the other circuits . b the neutral wire n and the earth wire e is common to all circuits . c all the appliances in a room are connected in parallel so that they work at the same voltage . d the connections from the live wire l is taken to one terminal of the appliance through a switch s . the other terminal is connected to the neutral wire n to complete the circuit .
concave mirror a concave mirror is one at which the reflection takes place at inner surface and whose outer surface is polished .
when we draw a circuit diagram . the various elements of a circuit are represented with the help of their symbols .
electricity from the ocean electricity can be generated from the ocean by utilizing the following facts . tides cause the level of sea water to rise and fall periodically . this is mainly due to the gravitational pull exerted by the moon . and to some extent by the sun . the water level is maximum at high tide and minimum at low tide . the difference in water levels can be utilized to generate electricity .
tidal power is similar to hydroelectric power except that it harnesses the energy in both directions . when the tides are coming in and out . there is a large amount of energy stored in the tides . tidal power stations can stretch over a delta . estuaries . beaches or other places that are affected by the tides . when high tide comes in . water flows through a turbine to create electricity . now . some of the water is up behind the barrage . a gate is lowered from the barrage . capturing the water above it . when low tide comes . the gate is raised and the water flows out . first transferring its energy through turbines . this way . electricity is created with a two way turbine .
electric motor an electric motor converts electrical energy into mechanical energy . the fact that a current carrying conductor experiences a force in a magnetic field is used in an electric motor . in a dc motor . the current flowing in a coil kept between the poles of a magnet makes it turn . a commutator is used to change the direction of the current in the coil at each half rotation to keep the coil turning .
a big size object with its foot on the principal axis parallel rays come inclined to the principal axis . image is formed at the second principal focus f . it is real . inverted and diminished smaller in size than the object . parallel rays from infinity foa convex lens big object at infinity . image at focus
now . putting q i x t and v i x r in equation . we get w i x t x i x r so . work done . w x r xt assuming that all the electrical work done or all the electrical energy consumed is converted into heat energy . we can write heat produced in place of work done in the above equation . thus . heat produced . h x r x t joules
below . first law of reflection . according to the first law of reflection of light the incident ray . the reflected ray . and the normal at the point of incidence . all lie in the same plane . for example . in figure . the incident ray ao . the reflected ray ob and the normal on . all lie in
at present of the electric power generated in india is through hydro electric power stations .
variable resistance pro р fig . a a circuit to study about the magnetc field around a straight conductor .
magnetic field due to a current carrying circular coil soon after oersted s discovery of magnetic effect of a current carrying wire . ampere found that a loop of wire also had a magnetic field .
huygen put forward the wave theory of light . this theory treats light as a wave . maxwell proved that light has wave nature it is an electromagnetic transverse wave . which does not require a medium to propagate .
potential difference and the flow of charge o charges charges an electrical potential difference arises out of charges . consider a group of stationary charges figure . . a separate charge q is placed at b . it experiences a force exerted by the group of charges . this affects the force required . and hence . the work done w in moving q to the point a . the quantity w q is called the potential difference between a and b . in other words . the potential difference between two points a and b is the work done per unit charge in taking a charge from b to a . we express this mathematically as fig . . v va v . here . v is the potential difference between the points a and b . and va and vb are the potentials at these points . while defining coordinates of a point in mathematics . you choose a point . call it the origin . and say that its coordinates are . . the coordinates of all other points are found by measuring the distances from this point . similarly . you can choose a reference point and say that the potential there is zero . the potentials of other points are found with respect to this point . quite often . the potential at infinity is chosen as zero .
it gets reflected from there and goes out from the front surface figure . a . generally . we neglect the thickness of the glass plate and think of the mirror as a single surface . hatching or other shading behind the surface represents silvering figure . b . properties of image formed by plane mirrors in previous classes you have learnt about the properties of an image formed by a plane mirror . the list below will help you recall them .
thermal power plant a thermal power plant produces electricity by burning the fossil fuels i . e . . coal or oil . a schematic diagram of a thermal power plant is shown in figure .
 bees are able to see ultra violet light but human beings cannot . explain . ans . the retina of bees contains cone cells which are sensitive to ultra violet light . human beings do not have those cone cells and therefore . we are ultra violet blind .
solar cell solar cell is a solar electric device by which solar energy is directly harnessed . it works on the phenomenon of photovoltaic conversion .
 a by convention . the direction of flow of positive charges is taken to be the direction of flow of current . so . the direction in which the positively charged particles such as protons or alpha particles . etc . . move will be the direction of electric current .
the reflector in this type of solar cooker is either concave or parabolic which is made of a large number of small plane mirrors joined together to give it a spherical shape . when sunrays fall on the spherical surface . it gets concentrated at the focus after reflecting from the reflector . due to this . the temperature of the region becomes very high much more than a box type of solar cooker and hence this type of solar cooker can even be used for frying . baking and roasting . mg .
х current right hand thumb t current straight conductor curled fingers of right hand magnetic field lines 
the centre of a spherical mirror is called its pole . in other words . the middle point of a spherical mirror is called its pole . in figure a . p is the pole of the concave mirror and in figure b . p is the pole of the convex mirror . the pole of a spherical mirror lies on the surface of the mirror .
propagation of light light travels along straight lines in a medium or in vacuum . the path of light changes only when there is an object in its path or where the medium changes . we call this rectilinear straight line propagation of light . light that starts from a point a and passes through another point b in the same medium actually passes through all the points on the straight line ab . such a straight line path of light is called a ray of light . light rays start from each point of a source and travel along straight lines till they fall on an object or a surface separating two media mediums . a bundle of light rays is called a beam of light . apart from vacuum and gases . light can travel through some liquids and solids . a medium in which light can travel freely over large distances is called a transparent medium . water . glycerine . glass and clear plastics are transparent . a medium in which light cannot travel is called opaque . wood . metals . bricks . etc . . are opaque . in materials like oil . light can travel some distance . but its intensity reduces rapidly . such materials are called translucent .
it is clear from the above discussion that to obtain a magnified and erect image with a concave mirror . the object should be placed between the pole and focus of the concave mirror . that is . the object should be placed within the focus or focal length of the concave mirror . for example . if the focal length of a concave mirror is cm . then its focus f will be at a distance of cm from the pole of the mirror . so . to obtain a magnified and erect image with this concave mirror . we will have to place the object at a distance of less than cm so that it remains between the pole and focus . thus . if we place the object at a distance of . say cm . from this concave mirror . the object will be within the focus and a magnified . virtual and erect image will be formed behind the concave mirror which can be seen by looking into the concave mirror .
an ac generator converts mechanical energy into alternating electrical energy .
 a person cannot see distinctly any object placed beyond cm from his eye . calculate the power of the lens which will enable him to see distant stars clearly . ans . as the person cannot see objects clearly beyond . m . his far point is . m . he wants to see distant stars clearly . i . e . . distance of object is infinity . so he should use lens which forms image of distant object u at a distance of cm is in front of it . l p . . . p . d . .
fig . a prism splits white light into its constituent seven colours .
ss sse sss e golder ge bagher osis so idence is sssssssss note . snell s law and hence laws of refraction fails if angle of incidence is zero i . e . . i . at this angle the ray passes into the second media without bending as shown in figure . . mummy . snell s law also fails if the two media have the same refractive index . . if medium is air and medium is glass . then snell s law is expressed as ser . . . bases go sdllic tell sia la nave soge grava d hennar s class . inen snelis law as st esel sos roos beste ser . seeds choses ss . see footer besede ess os vs more . ng . here ang is called the refractive index of glass with respect ves sin i sin r to air . s os ger eller bere sess ssss recordero
 b cartridge fuse to protect electric appliances like television sets . computers . etc . . which are highly expensive and also very sensitive to voltage fluctuation . cartridge fuses are used . such fuses are of fixed current capacity and form a part of the electric appliance . the parts of a cartridge fuse are as shown in figure c . the symbol of an electric fuse is shown in figure d .
 substituting the values of the currents in the above equation . v v v v reg r₂ r₂ r₃ or reg r . r₂ r₃ similarly . if there are n resistors connected in parallel . their equivalent resistance req is given by equivalent resistance of resistors in parallel r . r . r . . . . . r . for two resistances r . and r connected in parallel . r r r r r . rr . sore r r . r . . . . . r₂ r₂ we see that the equivalent resistance in a parallel connection is less than each of the resistances . you can use this result to explain why the resistance of a metallic wire is inversely proportional to its area of cross section . you can think of a thick wire as a parallel combination of several thin wires . the resistance of the combination is less than that of each of the thin wires . in other words . the resistance of a thick wire is less than that of a thin wire .
we will now derive a formula for calculating the combined resistance resultant resistance or equivalent resistance of two resistors connected in parallel . in figure . two resistances rị and r are connected parallel to one another between the same two points a and b . a battery of v volts has been applied across the ends of this combination . in this case the potential difference across the ends of both the resistances will be the same . and it will be equal to the voltage of the battery used . the current flowing through the two resistances in parallel is . however . not the same . suppose the total current flowing in the circuit is i . then the current passing through resistance r will be and the current passing through the resistance r will be i see figure . it is obvious that total current . i . . . suppose the resultant resistance of this parallel combination is r . then by applying ohm s law to the whole circuit . we get i . . . 
the image is of the same size as the object . ab height of the object a b height of the image . the image is laterally inverted .
plane mirror is laterally inverted or sideways reversed with respect to the object . it is due to lateral inversion that the image of our right hand appears to be our left hand . so . when we sit in front of a plane mirror and write with our right hand . it appears in the mirror that we are writing with the left hand . and it is also due to lateral inversion that the parting in our hair on the right appears to be on the left when seen in a mirror . the word ambulance on the hospital vans is written in the form of its mirror image as ovajuoma see figure . this is because when we are driving our car and see the hospital van coming from behind in our rear view mirror . then we will get the laterally inverted image of jõnajuoma and read it as ambulance . since an ambulance carries seriously ill patients . we can make way for it to pass through and reach the hospital quickly . we are now in a position to give all the characteristics of an image formed by a plane mirror . . the image formed in a plane mirror is virtual . it cannot be received on a screen .
 iv retina the innermost coating of the eye . covering the rear of inner surface is the retina . in other words . it is the screen on which the image is formed by the eye lens . retina contains a large number
looking at the face of the coil . if the current around that face is in clockwise direction . the face is the south pole while if the current around that face is in the anticlockwise direction . the face is the north pole .
differences between a bar magnet or permanent magnet and an electromagnet bar magnet or permanent magnet electromagnet . the bar magnet is a permanent magnet . . an electromagnet is a temporary magnet . its magnetism is only for the duration of current passing through it . so . the magnetism of an electromagnet can be switched on or switched off as desired . . a permanent magnet produces a . an electromagnet can produce very strong magnetic comparatively weak force of attraction . force . . the strength of a permanent magnet . the strength of an electromagnet can be changed cannot be changed . by changing the number of turns in its coil or by changing the current passing through it . . the north south polarity of a permanent . the polarity of an electromagnet can be changed by magnet is fixed and cannot be changed . changing the direction of current in its coil .
activity corner to find the shape of magnetic field lines produced by a bar magnet to draw magnetic field lines . fix a white paper on a drawing board with the help of drawing pins and keep a bar magnet in the middle of the sheet . now . place the magnetic compass near the north pole . the magnetic needle of the compass orients itself such that the tail is towards the north pole . mark the point a on the white paper where the arrowhead of the compass is oriented . now . pick up the compass and keep it again on the paper such that the tail orients towards point a and mark the point b along the direction of arrowhead of the needle . repeat the same operation to get point c . d . e . f . g and h .
connect the wire to a battery through a key . sprinkle some iron filings on the cardboard . switch on the key and tap the cardboard gently . you will find that the iron filings arrange themselves in the form of concentric circles . reverse the direction of current by changing the polarity of the battery . you will find that this time too . the iron filings arrange themselves in concentric circles but in opposite direction . hence . the magnetic field lines of force around a straight conductor carrying electric current are concentric circles with the conductor at the centre .
figure . a picture showing the formation of image of the sun by a convex lens .
activity corner to determine the principal focus and rough focal length of a convex lens . fix a convex lens in a holder . allow sunlight to fall on the convex lens . now take a sheet of paper and adjust its position on the other side of the lens till a small but bright spot of light is formed on the paper as shown in figure . this spot of light is the principal focus of the given convex lens . measure the distance of the paper from the lens . this distance is equal to the rough focal length of the lens .
dispersion of light in nature when sunlight falls on the water drops suspended in the atmosphere after rainfall . rainbow is formed due to the dispersion of sun light . the water drops suspended in air or atmosphere act as prisms .
fig . shows the basic design of an ac generator . the armature consists of a coil of many turns wound over a soft iron core . the armature is placed between the concave poles of a strong magnet . the ends of the coil are connected to two cylindrical slip rings ry and r mounted on the shaft . each slip ring is permanently in contact with a carbon brush . the brushes are connected to the fixed terminals p and q . electric devices such as an electric bulb or a fan can be connected to these terminals as shown in the figure .
deres fig . a converging lens can be supposed to be made up of prisms which have their base towards the centre . a fig . a diverging lens can be supposed to be made up of prisms having their apex towards the centre .
stretch the forefinger . the middle finger . and the thumb of your right hand mutually perpendicular to each other as shown in figure . . then . if the thumb represents the direction of motion of conductor force and forefinger the direction of magnetic field then the middle finger gives the direction of induced current remember this rule by fbi .
all available energy sources can be divided into two categories primary and secondary energy source .
the devices used to harness this energy are called ocean thermal energy conversion otec power plants . a temperature difference of about c upto a water level difference of m is required to operate these plants . in one of the otec power plants the warm surface water is used to boil ammonia . the vapours of this liquid is then used to drive turbines and hence generators . the cold sea water is pumped up again to convert ammonia into vapour . this system can be operated hours in a day . this system is depicted in figure . .
disadvantages of nuclear energy the disadvantages of nuclear energy are that i the waste products of nuclear fission reactions produced at nuclear power plants are radioactive which keep on emitting harmful nuclear radiations for thousands of years . so . it is very difficult to store or dispose of nuclear wastes safely . improper nuclear waste storage or disposal can pollute the environment . ii there is the risk of accidents in nuclear reactors especially the old nuclear reactors . such accidents lead to the leakage of radioactive materials which can cause serious damage to the plants . animals including human beings and the environment . iii the high cost of installation of nuclear power plants and the limited availability of my studygear uranium fuel make the large scale use of nuclear energy prohibitive .
near point the nearest point up to which the eye can see clearly is called the near point of the eye . for a young adult with normal vision . the near point is about cm . this distance is known as least distance of distinct vision .
dispersion of white light by a glass prism when a ray of white light sunlight enters a glass prism denser medium . it emerges out from it . broken into seven colours . this phenomenon . due to which different components of a white light are separated by a denser medium . is called dispersion . the phenomenon of splitting of white light into seven colours when it passes through a glass prism is called dispersion of white light .
effect of industrialisation all the factories and companies which are engaged in the process of manufacturing goods from raw materials . taken together . are called an industry . the process of developing industries in a country on a large scale is called industrialisation . industrialisation has led to a better quality of life of the people all over the world . but the setting up of industries and running them needs energy . so . the increasing industrialisation has caused the demand for energy to grow at a tremendous rate . at present . the growing demand for energy is largely met through the use of fossil fuels coal . petroleum and natural gas .
 . power of accommodation it is the ability of the eye to change the focal length of the eye lens so as to always obtain the image at the retina . the eye focuses on a given object by varying the shape of the pliable crystalline lens through an amazing process arus called accommodation . an important component in accommodation is the ciliary muscle . which is attached to the lens . when the eye is focused on distant objects . the ciliary muscle is relaxed . for an object distance of infinity . the focal length of the eye the distance between the lens and the retina is about . cm . the eye focuses on nearby objects by tensing the ciliary muscle . this action effectively decreases the focal length by slightly decreasing the radius of curvature of the lens . which allows the image to be focused on the retina . this lens adjustment takes place so swiftly that we are not even aware of the change . again . in this respect . even the finest electronic camera is a toy . compared with the eye . it is evident that there is a limit to accommodation because objects that are very close to the eye produce blurred images . when we try to see objects lying nearby the ciliary muscles contract to increase the curvature of the lens . the thickness of the lens increases so that its focal length decreases and the image is again formed on the retina . this process of adjustment of the focal length is called accommodation . the power of accommodation of the eye is the maximum variation of its power for focusing nearby and distant objects . for a young person . the power of accommodation is about dioptre .
note be geessee ee s seseos eba edc a convex lens produces a virtual image if the object lies between the optical centre and the focus . persero c erca bu
ility to colour blindness is the lack of ability to distinguish between different colours .
competition window prism formula for refraction through a prism it is found that i e a where a r r when a and i are small u a in a position of minimum deviation om . i e . and r r r . . i atom and r 
figures a and b shows the magnetic lines of force of the field due to a current carrying solenoid and a bar magnet respectively . the similarity of lines again shows that a solenoid and a bar magnet are identical in magnetic behaviour .
in figure . . negative electrons arrive at the positive terminal of the battery . the same effect would have been achieved if an equivalent amount of positive charge had left the positive terminal . therefore . the drawing shows the conventional current originating from the positive terminal . the direction of conventional current is always from a point of higher potential towards a point of lower potential . that is . from the positive terminal of a battery towards the negative terminal of the battery . in this book . the symbol i stands for conventional current .
done by a current i when it flows through a resistance r for time t . now . when an electric charge q moves against a potential difference v . the amount of work done is given by w q v . . . . from the definition of current we know that current . so . ixt and from ohm s law . we have r . potential difference . v i x r or . . . 
advantages otec system can be operated for hours throughout the year . unlike the other ocean energy generating system one does not have to wait for tides or waves .
in other words . the angle between the reflected ray and normal is called the angle of reflection . in figure . the reflected ray is ob and the normal is on . so the angle nob is the angle of reflection . the angle of reflection is denoted by the letter r . keeping these points in mind . we will now describe the laws of reflection of light .
source of energy of the sun hans bethe in suggested that the source of energy of the sun and other stars is thermo nuclear or nuclear fusion reactions .
legend ascribes the name magnetite to the shepherd magnes . the nails of whose shoes and the tip of whose staff stuck fast in a magnetic field while he pastured his flocks . a magnet has two poles a north seeking called north pole and a south seeking called a south pole .
for the two lenses the sign conventions take the form . u is ve . if the object is in front of the lens . real object . u is ve . if the object is virtual . . v is ve . if the image is on the same side as that of the object . virtual image . v is ve . if the image is real . . focal length of a concave lens is taken as ve . . focal length of a convex lens is taken as ve .
in order to show that the prism itself does not produce colour but simply splits it . newton performed the following experiment 
figure represents the action of the objective lens of a telescope . because in a telescope . the objective lens is a convex lens which forms a real . inverted and diminished image of the distant object at its focus . please note that when the object kept at infinity in front of a convex lens is assumed to be a big arrow pointing upwards . then its image is formed at focus according to the ray diagram shown in figure . if . however . the object kept at infinity in front of a convex lens is round in shape like the sun . then its image is formed at the focus according to the ray diagram shown in figure on page .
please note that if a ray of light falls normally or perpendicularly to the surface of water . even then there is no bending of light ray . and it goes straight through water .
in order to find the direction of magnetic field lines . we plot the magnetic field with the help of a compass needle . the pattern of magnetic field lines so obtained is shown in figure c . from this pattern . the following important conclusions have been drawn .
 prism angle of a prism is . their refractive index for red and violet colours is . and . respectively . then find the dispersive power . ans . dispersive power of prism . w h . m . m . . . . . dal my but uy my . . therefore w . . . . 
as an object is brought closer to the eye . the ciliary muscles contract . this increases the thickness of the crystalline lens and decreases the focal length of the eye lens . this helps to form a sharp image on the retina . at a certain point near the eye . the ciliary muscles reach the limit of their contraction . if an object is brought closer still . the ciliary muscles cannot contract further . the closest point at which an object can be placed and seen clearly is called the near point of the eye . and . the distance of the closest point at which an object can be placed and seen clearly is called the least distance of distinct vision or the least distance of clear vision . when an object is placed at the near point that is . at a distance equal to the least distance of distinct vision . the curvature and thickness of the crystalline lens are maximum and the focal length of the eye lens is minimum figure . b . the near point of the eye varies from person to person and with age . at a very young age below years . the ciliary muscles are strong and flexible . and therefore . they can contract to a great extent . at this age . the near point may be as close as to cm from the eye . in old age . the ciliary muscles lose flexibility . and hence . the ability to contract to the required extent is lost . as a result . the near point recedes to to m . or even more . however . the standard value of the least distance of distinct vision for the normal human eye is taken as centimetres . most relaxed state of ciliary muscles most contracted state of ciliary muscles near point far point least distance of distinct vision b shortest focal length of the eye lens a largest focal length of the eye lens fig . . far point and near point
correction the image of a normal near point which is cm from the eye lens is formed behind the retina of eye having long sight defect as shown in figure a . the image of the normal near point formed on the retina is blurred . the near point of such eye is little far from the near point of normal eye as shown in figure b . this defect can be corrected by using a convex lens of suitable focal length . so . a man suffering from this defect wears spectacles having convex lens nvex lens
magnets certain rocks behave as natural magnets . when suspended from a string . they align along the south to north direction . these natural magnets contain magnetite feo . a magnetic compound . magnets can also be made artificially by certain methods . magnets made of certain alloys of iron . nickel and cobalt retain their magnetism for a long time and are . therefore . called permanent magnets . and the material which retains magnetism for a long time is called a hard magnetic material . alnico an alloy of aluminium . nickel and cobalt . and certain types of steel like carbon steel and cobalt steel are some hard magnetic materials used for making permanent magnets . permanent magnets are made in various shapes such as bar . rod . disc and ring figure . a . you also get horseshoe magnets . which are shaped like a horseshoe or the letter u . in bar . rod and horseshoe magnets . the north and south poles are either indicated by the letters n and s . or only the north pole is indicated by a dot . in disc and ring magnets . one face is the north pole while the other is the south pole . one of the most common uses of a permanent magnet is as a direction finding compass . a magnetic compass has a small light magnet . called the magnetic needle . the needle can move freely in a horizontal plane . when kept away from other magnets . the north pole of the needle points towards the geographical north of the earth .
rods and cones the retina of our eye has a large number of light sensitive cells . there are two kinds of light sensitive cells on the retina rods and cones .
nuclear fusion is a temperature dependent reaction .
object at distance more than twice the focal length real object ab has its image a b formed between distance f and f . the image is real . inverted and diminished smaller in size than the object . f a af b ye convex lens object beyond f . image betweenfand f
there are different types of fuses . the old type of fuse is made of two metal clamps fixed on a porcelain base with a grove in between fig . a . the fuse wire is connected in between the metal clamps which are inserted in the appropriate section of the circuit .
 . the phenomenon of refraction of light light can travel through many different media . such as solids . liquids . and gases . although it does so at different speeds . in this chapter . we will see that when light passes from one medium . such as air . into another medium . such as glass . the difference in speeds leads to a change in the direction of travel . this bending of the light lies at the heart of some remarkable effects . for example . the change in direction of light is responsible for rainbows and the sparkle of diamonds .
a number of images formed by two plane mirrors when two plane mirrors are inclined to each other at an angle . the number of images of a point object formed as follows a if n is an even integer . then number of images formed is n for all positions of the object . for example if a . even and number of images is . if . . number of images is . b if n is an odd integer . the number of images formed is n . if the object does not lie on the plane which bisects the angle between mirrors and n . if the object lies on the plane which bisects angle between the mirrors . for example if . if object lies asymmetrically . number of images is and if symmetrically number of images is . c if is is a fraction . the number of images formed will be equal to the integral part . for example if . . . number of images formed is . if . . . number of images is . 
the rate at which we are using the fossil fuels it is estimated that known deposits of petroleum in our country will get exhausted by the year . the coal reserves are expected to last for another years or so . some examples of non renewable sources of energy are coal natural gas petroleum
formation coal is believed to be formed from fossils of big trees which got buried inside the earth about million years ago due to occurrence of earthquakes and eruption of volcanoes .
mirror formula the distance of an object from the pole of a mirror is known as object distance . object distance is denoted by the letter u . the distance of image from the pole of a mirror is known as image distance . image distance is denoted by the letter v . the distance of focus from the pole of a mirror is known as focal length . focal length is denoted by the letter f . there is a relationship between the object distance . image distance and focal length of a spherical mirror concave mirror or convex mirror . this relationship is given by the mirror formula .
mathematically . sin i or sin r n sin n sin r where n is the refractive index of medium . in which the refracted ray travels . with respect to medium . in which the incident ray travels . this law is credited to willebrord snell and is . therefore . called as snell s law .
fleming s left hand rule for the direction of force when a current carrying wire is placed in a magnetic field . a force is exerted on the wire . fleming gave a simple rule to determine the direction of force acting on a current carrying wire placed in a magnetic field . this rule is known as fleming s left hand rule and it can be stated as follows .
biogas certain types of bacteria decompose wet biomass in an oxygen free anaerobic environment to produce a combustible mixture of gases . called biogas . the process is called anaerobic digestion . biogas can contain up to methane . carbon dioxide and other gases . including hydrogen and hydrogen sulphide . methane is an excellent fuel . biogas can be produced in a biogas plant by using cattle dung . sewage . agricultural residues . and so on . it can be used for electricity generation and for cooking . a few lakh biogas plants have been built in our country .
dh a mla b m a ni o c ma e fig . . w
rainbows a rainbow is perhaps the most beautiful optical phenomenon . it appears as a seven coloured arc in the sky when there are raindrops in the air . it is visible when the sun is low in the sky early mornings and late afternoons . to see the rainbow . you have to stand with the sun behind
front of a person s eye during eye testing . he immediately knows that this convex lens combination is equivalent to a single convex lens of power . d .
 . nuclear fission the word fission means to split up into two or more parts . the process in which the heavy nucleus of a radioactive atom such as uranium . plutonium or thorium splits up into smaller nuclei when bombarded with low energy neutrons . is called nuclear fission . a tremendous amount of energy is produced in the nuclear fission process . the sum of masses of the smaller nuclei formed in a fission reaction is a little less than that of the mass of the original heavy nucleus . so . there is a small loss of mass in the nuclear fission process which appears as a tremendous amount of energy . please note that nuclear fission is carried out by bombarding the heavy nuclei with low energy neutrons which are also called slow moving neutrons . we will now give an example of a nuclear fission reaction . we will use the easily fissionable isotope of uranium called uranium in this example .
electrical problems and safety measures when a wire carries more current than it can carry without overheating . it is said to be overloaded . an event in which a large current passes through the wires when the live and neutral wires touch accidentally is called a short circuit . an overload or a short circuit causes excessive heating of the wire . which may even cause a fire . to prevent this . fuses or circuit breakers are used . to prevent electric shocks in the event of the live wire touching the metallic body of an appliance . the body is connected to the earth wire .
let x distance of near point o of defective eye . d distance of near point o of normal eye least distance of distinct vision of normal eye . f focal length of convex lens to be used . for the correcting lens . object is at o . i . e . . u d image is at o . i . e . . v x
 . . electric power the rate of work . or the rate of dissipation of energy . is called electric power . von it is denoted by p . i . e . . w vit i²rt v t p t rt p vi r v .
mathematically . we can express this as power w x t hour total cost x cost of one unit 
 ii the wind required for generating electricity should be strong and steady to maintain the desired level of generation . the minimum wind speed necessary for satisfactory working of a wind generator is about km h . this is not always so . iii the wind energy farms require a large area of land .
or w x thus . work done . w joules
from the actual position of the star . moreover . the different layers of the atmosphere are mobile and the temperature and the density of layers of atmosphere changes continuously . hence . the apparent position of the star changes continuously . the change in the apparent position of the star continuously leads to the twinkling of a star .
 . disposal of nuclear waste disposal of nuclear wastes can be another cause of pollution . nuclear wastes like barium and krypton which are obtained after the fission of uranium are also radioactive . these radioactive elements emit radiations that are harmful to the living population .
this type of solar cooker consists of a larger concave reflector or parabolic reflector . the sun rays are focused by this reflector at a point f . the intense beam of sun rays increases the temperature of point f to c . the food to be cooked in a container is placed at point f . the concave reflector must be rotated so that it always face the sun for effective cooking of the food .
burning of fossil fuels pollutes the environment . therefore . we need to use them in a manner in which they cause less pollution . one such source is electricity . how would our lives change if we could no longer get electricity supply 
as we shall see . the focal length of a convex lens is taken as positive . whereas . that of a concave lens is taken as negative . so . the power of a convex lens is positive and that of a concave lens is negative .
refractive index of some common substances with respect to air or vacuum substance refractive index substance refractive index or medium n or medium n . air . . benzene . . ice . . crown glass . . water . . carbon disulphide . . alcohol . . dense flint glass . . sulphuric acid . . ruby . . kerosene . . sapphire . . turpentine oil . . diamond . 
armature armature abcd . also called the coil . consists of a large number of turns of insulted copper wire wound over a soft iron core . it revolves around an axle between the two poles of a strong magnet .
competition o window electromotive force and terminal potential difference of a cell . electromotive force emf of a battery is the work done by the battery force per unit charge . if an external resistor of resistance r is connected across a cell of emf ε and internal resistance r . then electric current flowing through it is given by r r the potential difference across the external resistance or terminal voltage v of cell is then given by v ir ir r or e i 
convex lens . in other words . the object ab is within the focus of the convex lens . a ray of light ad starting from the top of the object and parallel to the axis . passes through the other focus f after refraction through the lens and goes in the direction dx . another ray of light ac passing through the optical centre c of the lens goes straight in the direction cy . the two refracted rays dx and cy diverge away from one another and . therefore . they cannot meet at a point on the right side to form a real image . we produce the refracted rays dx and cy backwards to the left side by dotted lines . they appear to meet at point a on the left side . thus . a is the virtual image of point a of the object . to get the complete image of the object . we draw a b perpendicular to the axis
hypermetropia arises due to the following reasons i shortening of eyeball . ii the ciliary muscle is unable to change the shape of the lens enough to properly focus the image i . e . . the focal length of the eye lens is too long .
activity corner to study the d effect . this simple demonstration shows exactly how the eyes are used during parallel viewing . for this pick a specific object at a certain distance . aim your eyes at that target . while looking at that distant target . bring your index fingers . tips touching . up in front of your eyes and in to your line of sight . while still aiming your eyes at the distant target . calmly notice that a mini frank has appeared between the tips of your fingers . do not allow the beauty of the mini frank to distract you at it .
magnetic field figure . a magnetic strip in the refrigerator door is used to just as an electric charge creates an electric field . in the same way . a magnet keep it closed properly . creates a magnetic field around it . the space surrounding a magnet in which magnetic force is exerted . is called a magnetic field . a compass needle placed near a magnet gets deflected due to the magnetic force exerted by the magnet . and the iron filings also cling to the magnet due to magnetic force . the magnetic field pattern due to a bar magnet is shown in figure . the magnetic field has both . magnitude as well as direction . the direction of magnetic field at a point is the direction of the resultant force acting on a hypothetical north pole placed at that point . the north end of the needle of a compass indicates the direction of magnetic field at a point where it is placed .
only relative motion between the magnet and the coil is needed to generate a current it does not matter which one moves .
reflection of light from curved surfaces spherical mirrors so far we have discussed the reflection of light from plane surfaces like that of a plane mirror . when a parallel beam of light rays falls on a plane mirror . it is reflected as a parallel beam . so . a plane mirror changes only the direction of incident light rays . it does not converge or diverge the parallel rays of light to bring the parallel rays of light closer together is called to converge the light rays whereas to spread out the parallel rays of light is called to diverge the light rays . we will now describe the spherical mirrors which can converge or diverge the parallel rays of light which fall on them . please note that the spherical mirrors have a curve like surface . so they are also known as curved mirrors . we will first define the spherical mirrors and then study the reflection of light from these spherical mirrors .
domestic circuits in india . the household electric supply is ac v . hz . all electrical appliances in the house are connected in parallel .
image is formed . please note that we should never look at the sun through a convex lens . it can damage our eyes permanently by focussing a lot of sunlight energy into our eyes .
so . applying ohm s law to the whole circuit . we get v r orv r since the same current i flows through all the resistances r . r and r in series . so by applying ohm s law to each resistance separately . we will get v i x r . . . v i x r and v i x rz . . . m studygear putting these values of v . v . v and v in equation . we get i x r i x r i x r i x r or i x r i x r r r cancelling i from both sides . we get r r r r thus . if three resistors r . r . and r are connected in series then their total resistance r is given by the formula r r r r similarly . if there are four resistors r . r . rz and r connected in series . then their resultant resistance r is given by the formula r r r r rą and so on . we will now solve some problems based on the combination of resistances in series .
red a object b laterally inverted image as seen in plane mirror diagram to show lateral inversion
the circuit shown in figure a is complete due to closed switch . since there is no gap . therefore . current flows in this circuit and the bulb lights up . in this case . the electrons can move through the external circuit . these moving electrons form an electric current . the circuit given in figure b is broken due to a gap because of open switch . so no current flows in this circuit and bulb goes off . the electrons cannot flow in this circuit due to the gap produced by the open switch .
it may be a resistance or a combination of different electrical components . . connecting wires these are thick wires made of copper . these are used to connect the various components of a circuit . . cell it is an arrangement which converts chemical energy into electrical energy . it is a source of a constant supply of current . it is represented by two unequal vertical lines . the longer line represents the positive ve terminal and the shorter represents the negative ve terminal . . battery a battery is a series combination of a number of cells . it too has a positive and a negative terminal . . ac source it is used to represent an alternating source of current . it is represented with the help of a sine wave inside a circle . . fixed resistance it is also a load which is connected to the circuit . it opposes the flow of current . the output is also obtained across a resistance . it has a fixed value . . rheostat it is a variable resistor whose resistance can be varied . this is done by moving the jockey on the top of the rheostat . it has three terminals . two of these are situated at the bottom of the rheostat and one is situated at the top . when it is used as a variable resistor . then one of the bottom terminals and the top terminals are used . if both the bottom terminals are used it works as a fixed resistor . . switch a switch is an arrangement used to switch on or off a circuit . . voltmeter it is an instrument used to measure the potential difference across two points in a circuit . it is always connected in parallel in a circuit . it has a positive terminal . through which current enters . and a negative terminal . through which current leaves fig . . the resistance of an ideal voltmeter is infinity .
formation of different types of images by a concave mirror the type of image formed by a concave mirror depends on the position of object in front of the mirror . we can place the object at different positions or different distances from a concave mirror to get
b has an excess of electrons and a has deficiency of electrons . the charge will flow from b to a . till b loses all its extra electrons or a gains the required number of electrons to make up the deficiency of electrons . this flow will continue till their electric potentials become equal . keeping the convention of flow from the higher potential to the lower potential . the electric current is said to flow from a to b i . e . in the direction opposite to the direction of flow of electrons which actually constitutes the electric current .
 . conventional or non renewable sources of energy
the ratio of the sine of angle of incidence to the sine of the angle of refraction is constant . oso di fig . a ray of light incident normal to the glass slab is not refracted .
illustrations a cylinder of a material is cm long and has a cross section of cm² . if its resistance along the length be ohm . what will be its resistivity ans . here . cm . a cm r ohm using . rupa
all the fuels produce heat energy on burning . different fuels produce different amounts of heat on burning . some fuels produce more heat whereas others produce less heat . the usefulness of a fuel is measured in terms of its calorific value . higher the calorific value . better the fuel will be . the amount of heat produced by burning a unit mass of the fuel completely is known as its calorific value . the unit of mass usually taken for measuring the calorific value of a fuel is gram . so . we can also say that the amount of heat produced by burning gram of a fuel completely is called its calorific value . for example . when one gram of a carbon fuel like charcoal is burned completely . it produces about joules of heat . so the calorific value of charcoal is joules per gram or j g . since joule is a very small unit of heat energy . so the calorific value is usually expressed as kilojoules per gram kj g . thus . the calorific value of charcoal becomes kilojoules per gram which is written in short form as kj g . thus . the common unit of measuring calorific value is kilojoules per gram kj g . please note that the calorific value of a fuel represents the heat value of the fuel . the calorific values of some common fuels are given below .
this process continues till the light enters our eyes . so due to refraction of light . the apparent position of the star is different
atmospheric refraction you know that the earth is surrounded by a layer of air called the atmosphere . the density of air in the atmosphere is not the same everywhere . in general . it is greatest at the earth s surface and goes on decreasing as we move higher . the refractive index of air depends on its density higher the density of air . greater its refractive index . under standard conditions of temperature . humidity . etc . . near the earth s surface . the refractive index of air is slightly greater than . it decreases with height . and is very close to in the outermost region of the atmosphere . the changes in refractive index of air give rise to many phenomena . for example . a rising current of hot air makes the objects viewed through it seem to flicker . you might have seen this happen as hot air rises above the heated surface of roads on hot summer days or above a large burning stove or chulha . hot air has less density . and hence . less refractive index than normal or cold air . at a point in the area above a hot surface . the refractive index keeps on changing as currents of hot air passes through it . so . the amount by which light passing through it is bent keeps on changing . this makes the objects viewed through this area seem to sway or flicker . 
thus . m i in terms of v and f v v v m v or и or f or or m ii in terms of u and f u v f и u и u и v or f or or m u f utf u if iml . then image is of same size as is object . if im . then image is magnified . if im . then image is diminished . the formula m is valid for convex as well as concave mirror and it is independent of nature of object real or virtual irrespective of its position . magnification can be either positive or negative depending on the nature of the image . if m is negative . then image is inverted with respect to object and if m is positive then image is erect with respect to object . real image is not always inverted and virtual image is not always erect .
rules for obtaining images formed by convex mirrors in order to construct ray diagrams to find out the position . nature and size of the images formed by a convex mirror . we should remember the paths of the following rays of light . we can call them the rules for obtaining images in convex mirrors .
from infinity fig . image formation by a concave lens when the object is placed at infinity
factors on which the resistance of a conductor depends it has been found that the resistance of a conductor a wire depends on 
 . . uses of electromagnets there are numerous uses of an electromagnet . a few of these are i electromagnet forms a part of many modern electrical devices such as the doorbell . telegraph . telephone . loudspeakers . electric horn . tape recorder . electric motor . dynamo circuit breakers etc . ii electromagnets with very large magnetic field are used in industry and municipalities to lift and transfer iron and steel articles as well as scrap very conveniently fig . . iii for separating iron from non magnetic materials . for example . in metallurgy . we use magnetic concentration of some ores . iv in hospitals . bits of iron embedded in sensitive areas like the eye can be removed by an electromagnet . v an electromagnet without its iron core a solenoid carrying current can be used to magnetize a steel bar and make a permanent bar magnet . vi in research . in many scientific investigations electromagnets have become a very important tool . deflection of charged particles . focusing electron beams electron microscopes . acceleration of electrons . protons etc . at very high energies in particle accelerators such as betatron . cyclotron . synchrotron etc . . for containing hot plasma in very strong magnetic fields required in thermonuclear fusion reactions . are some of the many applications in scientific research .
the phenomenon of producing electric current by moving a magnet near a coil is called electromagnetic induction .
 . the vegetation which is submerged under water at the dam site rots under anaerobic conditions and produces a large amount of methane which is a greenhouse gas and hence harmful for the environment . the opposition to the construction of tehri dam on the river ganga and sardar sarovar project on the river narmada are due to such problems . so . before taking a decision to generate hydroelectricity by constructing high rise dams on rivers . it is necessary to consider its long term effects on the environment and social life carefully .
a current would also be created in figure . . if the magnet were held stationary and the coil were moved . because the magnetic field at the coil would be changing as the coil approached or receded from the magnet .
when we increase the current through the conductor . we find that the deflection of the compass needle increases . this means that the magnitude of magnetic field around the conductor increases as the current through it is increased . when we move the compass away from the conductor we find that the deflection of the compass needle decreases . thus . the magnetic field produced by a given current in the conductor decreases as the distance from it increases .
in a spherical reflector type solar cooker . a spherical reflector is used to concentrate the sunrays to obtain higher temperatures . the construction of spherical reflector type solar cooker is shown in figure . .
symbols for electrical components or circuit symbols in electric circuits . we have to show various electrical components such a cell . a battery . connecting wires . wire joints . fixed resistance . variable resistance . ammeter . voltmeter . galvanometer . an open switch . a closed switch . and an electric bulb or lamp . etc . now . to draw the electric circuits by making the actual sketches of the various electrical components is a difficult job and takes a lot of time . so . the scientists have devised some symbols for electrical components which are easy to draw . they are called electrical symbols or circuit symbols . the common electrical symbols for electrical components which are used in drawing circuit diagrams are given below 
 . thermal power plant in a thermal power plant some fossil fuel is burnt to produce heat . this heat is then used to heat water and produce steam . the steam so produced is used to run turbines which in turn run the generators to produce electricity .
 . the image formed in a plane mirror is erect . it is the same side up as the object . . the image in a plane mirror is of the same size as the object . . the image formed by a plane mirror is at the same distance behind the mirror as the object is in front of the mirror . . the image formed in a plane mirror is laterally inverted or sideways reversed .
presbyopia in old age . the ciliary muscles become weak and are not able to contract enough to decrease the focal length adequately . in this case also . objects at the normal near point are not focused on the retina . when far sightedness occurs due to this reason . it is called presbyopia . correcting far sightedness to see an object placed at the normal near point . n . clearly . its sharp image should be formed on the retina . for this . the rays should seem to be coming from n . the near point of the defective eye . to do this . the rays are made less divergent by placing a convex lens in front of the eye figure . c . rays of light coming from n pass through the convex lens . when produced backwards . the emergent rays meet at the point n . thus . a sharp image is formed on the retina .
figure a . now . without moving our head . we pour water into the basin . we will find that on adding water . the coin appears to rise and we are able to see it see figure b . the coin under water appears to be raised and becomes visible due to the refraction of light which takes place when it goes from water into air . we will now understand all this more clearly with the help of a ray diagram .
an electromagnet works only for the time current is passed through it . a permanent magnet gets demagnetised if i it is heated . ii it is rough handled .
newton s third law of motion according to which if a current carrying wire exerts a force on a magnet . then the magnet will exert an equal and opposite force on the current carrying wire . in . faraday discovered that when a current carrying conductor is placed in a magnetic field . a mechanical force is exerted on the conductor which can make the conductor move . this is known as the motor principle and forms the basis of a large number of electrical devices like electric motor and moving coil galvanometer . we will now describe an experiment to demonstrate the force exerted by a magnet on a current carrying wire and to show how the direction of force is related to the direction of current and the direction of magnetic field .
illustrations what causes the wind to blow ans . equatorial regions on the earth receive more solar radiation than other parts of the earth . as such . the air at equatorial regions is hotter and rises upwards into the atmosphere . the cooler air from other regions especially polar regions starts blowing to the equatorial regions to fill the
uses of natural gas i natural gas is used as a domestic fuel and industrial fuel . ii natural gas is used as a source of hydrogen gas needed in fertilizer industry . iii natural gas is used as a source of carbon black used in tyre industry . note that use of natural gas has many advantages over the use of other fuels . i natural gas is a complete fuel and can be used directly in homes and industries . it can be supplied using gas pipes and hence the problem of transportation does not arise . natural gas is being supplied through pipes in baroda city in gujarat . ii natural gas has a very high calorific value of about kj g . iii natural gas is a smokeless fuel and causes no pollution and leaves no residue after burning
point o . so it does not bend on entering the glass slab or on coming out of the glass slab . it goes straight in the direction aobc . since the incident ray goes along the normal to the surface . the angle of incidence in this case is zero and the angle of refraction is also zero .
the design of a nuclear power plant is basically the same as that of a power plant that burns fossil fuel except that the burners are replaced by a reactor core . in both instances . steam is used to drive a turbine connected to an electrical generator .
the si unit of electric charge is coulomb which is denoted by the letter c . we can define this unit of charge as follows one coulomb is that quantity of electric charge which exerts a force of x newtons on an equal charge placed at a distance of metre from it . we now know that all the matter contains positively charged particles called protons and negatively charged particles called electrons . a proton possesses a positive charge of . x c whereas an electron possesses a negative charge of . x c . it is obvious that the unit of electric charge called coulomb is much bigger than the charge of a proton or an electron . this point will become more clear from the following example .
finding new sources of energy is essential for us to overcome the energy crisis .
principal focus and focal length of a convex lens suppose a parallel beam of light rays falls on a convex lens as shown in figure . these light rays are parallel to one another and also parallel to the axis of the lens . the incident rays pass through the convex
when the dispersed white light is made to fall on a white screen . we get a seven coloured band of light . this coloured band is called spectrum . the order of the colours from the lower end of the spectrum is violet . indigo . blue . green . yellow . orange and red . the colours can be remembered by the word vibgyor . in air . light waves of all colours have same velocity x m sl .
nature of image real . inverted and extremely diminished in size . point size real . inverted and diminished real . inverted and equal to the size of the object real . inverted and bigger than object real . inverted and extremely magnified virtual . erect and magnified
parallel connection of resistors activity connect three resistors r . r . and rz . an ammeter . a cell and a plug key . as shown in figure . a . close the key and note the ammeter reading . this gives the current i in the circuit . now . connect the ammeter in the branch of the circuit that has r . figure . b and note the reading . this gives the current i . through the branch . similarly . place the ammeter in the branches containing r and r . and measure the currents i and iz respectively .
magnification produced by lenses the size of image formed by a lens depends on the position of the object from the lens . for example . the image formed by a convex lens can be smaller than the object . equal to the object or bigger than the object . the size of the image relative to the object is given by the linear magnification . the linear magnification is the ratio of the height of the image to the height of the object . that is magnification height of image height of object
the resistivities of alloys are much more higher than those of the pure metals from which they are made . for example . the resistivity of manganin which is an alloy of copper . manganese and nickel is about times more than that of copper and the resistivity of constantan which is an alloy of copper and nickel is about times more than that of copper metal . it is due to their high resistivities that manganin and constantan alloys are used to make resistance wires or resistors used in electronic appliances to reduce the current in an electrical circuit . another alloy having a high resistivity is nichrome . this is an
difference between box type solar cooker and spherical reflector type solar cooker . s . no . box type solar cooker plane reflector is used . spherical reflector type low temperature is produced c . cannot be used for baking and frying . spherical reflector is used in the form of concave or concave parabolic . high temperature is produced around c . can be used for baking and frying .
 a dash b dash is the complete image of the object ab which has been formed by the plane mirror see figure .
two equal and opposite forces acting at different position of the armature coil constitute a couple . this couple rotates the coil in clockwise direction until the coil is in the vertical position as shown in figure a . at this position . the contacts of commutator and brushes break . so the supply of current to the coil is cut off . hence . no force acts on the arms of the coil . but the coil goes on rotating due to the inertia of motion of the coil until commutator again comes in contact with the brushes b and b .
please note that different types of glass have different chemical compositions due to which they have somewhat different values of refractive indices . because of this reason no single value can be given for the refractive index of all types of glass . the refractive index of glass usually varies from . to . . another point to be noted is that diamond has a very high refractive index of . .
working of a dc motor look at figure . a . the brush b is connected to the positive terminal of the battery . and b is connected to the negative terminal . so . a current flows in the coil along abcd a b d . figure . b shows the position of the coil after half a rotation from the initial position . as a result of the rotation . the brushes with which the two halves of the commutator were in contact have got interchanged . this has reversed the battery connections to the two arms of the coil . therefore . the current now flows along dcba . that is . the direction of the current in the two arms of the coil has got reversed . such a change takes place for each half rotation . in this way . the commutator changes the direction of the current in the coil after each half rotation . the two arms of the coil carry a current in a magnetic field . so . each arm experiences a force . the directions of the forces are shown by the grey arrows in the figure . in the position shown in figure . a . the arm ab experiences a downward force . while the arm cd experiences an upward force . this may be verified using fleming s left hand rule . the coil rotates in the anticlockwise direction because of these forces . after half a rotation . the direction of the current in the coil is reversed . as explained above . using fleming s left hand rule . we find that the arm ab now experiences an upward force . and the arm cd experiences a downward force . so . the coil continues to rotate in the anticlockwise direction . if the commutator is not used . the direction of current in an arm of the coil will always remain the same . so . the direction of the force on the arm will not change . and the coil will not be able to
if the direction of the current is reversed so that the current flow x to y . the direction of the field lines is also reversed . i . e . . these field lines are clockwise as shown in figure c .
measurement of potential difference potential difference between two points at the end of a resistance r . is measured by a high resistance electrical device . called voltmeter . for this purpose . it is connected in parallel with the resistance .
 . . . b p uniform wo end i end ii where n turn density n i n total number of turns length of solenoid r radius of solenoid if solenoid length is infinite then b mon cos cos mon unifrom 
we have just studied the spectrum of sun s white light which consists of seven coloured lights . if we look at the spectrum of white sunlight . we will observe that the reds and blues are very predominent in it . red coloured light has a longer wavelength but the blue coloured light has a shorter wavelength . in fact . the wavelength of blue light is almost half that of the red light . in . in an attempt to explain the he blue colour of the sky . tyndall discovered that when white light
this shows that when a charged particle moves in a magnetic field it too experiences a force . fleming s left hand rule is also used to find the direction of force experienced by a charge moving in a magnetic field . the direction of current in the rule is the direction in which a positive charge will move .
this rule is depicted in figure . a . to apply the rule . hold the current carrying conductor in your right hand such that the thumb points in the direction of current in the wire . now . curl your fingers as shown in figure . a around the wire . the direction of the fingers at any point around the wire gives the direction of the magnetic field lines at that point . in figure . a . the current is flowing upwards . when we curl the fingers around the wire we find that they curl in the anticlockwise direction . therefore . the magnetic field lines at a distance r from the conductor are also anticlockwise .
concentrator type solar cooker such solar energy devices which reflect and concentrate solar energy from over a large area into a small area are called solar concentrators .
concave lens a diverging lens can be supposed to be made up of a number of prisms with the base of each prism away from the centre of the lens . the central portion of the lens is a simple parallel sided glass slab which allows the ray of light to pass undeviated . as can be seen from figure . . the prisms in the upper part of the lens . deviate the rays of light towards their base i . e . . upwards whereas the prisms in the lower part of the lens deviate the rays towards their base i . e . . downwards . these rays seem to come from a point on the same side from where light is incident of the lens . this point is called the focus of the lens . thus . a concave lens diverges a parallel beam of light incident on it .
rule . a ray of light which is parallel to the principal axis of a convex mirror . appears to be coming from its focus after reflection from the mirror . this is shown in figure . in figure . the ray of light ab is parallel to the principal axis xp of a convex mirror . the ray of light ab gets reflected at point b on the mirror and goes in the direction bd . to a person on the left side . the reflected ray bd appears to be coming from the focus f of the convex mirror situated behind the mirror as shown by dotted line .
we will now describe how an image of the sun can be formed by a concave mirror . the sun is at a far off distance from us . so the sunlight rays reaching us are parallel rays . an image of the sun can be produced
ge fig . laser beams passing through two prisms and a glass slab making the combination behave as a convex lens .
 . laws of refraction when a ray of light moves from one medium into another it gets refracted . during refraction it follows certain laws . these laws are 
principal focus and focal length of a concave lens we have just studied that a convex lens converges a parallel beam of light rays . a concave lens has just the opposite effect on such rays of light . a concave lens diverges a parallel beam of light rays . the
 why is yellow sodium light used for illumination nination in foggy weather ans . yellow light has longer wavelength than
 . it is used as a reflector in street lamps so as to diverge light over a large area . convex mirror o sorosos sodassassos boys oss bulb osgosos sosorogorosos soldasoros area receiving light fig . a convex mirror is used to diverge light .
some properties of light light does not need a material medium to travel . i . e . . it can travel through a vacuum too . the best example of this is light travelling from the sun to the earth across vast expanses of space that have no material or matter . compare this with sound . which is also a wave . sound needs a material medium to travel . light waves travel at a tremendous speed whose value scientists have fixed at . . m s . according to current scientific theories . no material particle can travel at a speed greater than that of light . the light that enables us to see has a very small wavelength less than ten thousandth part of a centimetre . in comparison . the wavelength of audible sound is of the order of a few centimetres to a few metres .
known as a diverging lens because it diverges a parallel beam of light rays see figure . since the light rays do not actually pass through the focus of a concave lens . a concave lens has a virtual focus . in figure . the distance cf is the focal length of concave lens . the distance cf is also equal to the focal length . a yet another term which is used in the study of spherical lenses is aperture . the aperture of a spherical lens convex lens or concave lens is the surface from which refraction of light takes place through the lens . the aperture of spherical lens is represented by its diameter . in most simple words . mple words . figure . this picture shows that light diverges or spreads aperture tells us the size of the lens . after passing through a concave lens . s
case . when the object is at f object at f by saying that the object is placed at f . we mean that the object is at a distance equal to twice the focal length of the convex lens . in other words . the object is placed at a distance f from the convex lens . figure shows an object ab placed at a distance f twice the focal length . from a convex lens . a ray of light ad which is parallel to the principal axis passes through the focus f after refraction and goes in the direction df see figure . another ray of light ac passing through the optical centre c of the lens . goes straight and meets the first refracted ray at point a . on the right side of the lens . thus . a is the real image of point a of the object . we draw a b perpendicular to the axis to get the complete image a b . we find that the image a b is formed at f . at a distance f on the right side
an artificial magnet is one . which is made by man by magnetising small pieces of iron or nickel .
please note that if the direction of current in the front face of a circular wire is clockwise . then the direction of current in the back face of this circular wire will be anticlockwise and vice versa . this means that the front face of this current carrying circular wire will be a south pole but its back face will be a north pole . for example . the direction of current in the front face of current carrying circular wire shown in figure is clockwise . so the front face of this current carrying circular wire will be a south magnetic pole s pole . if . however . we view the current carrying circular wire given in figure from back side . we will find that the direction of current flowing in the back face of this circular wire is anticlockwise . due to this . the back face of this current carrying circular wire will be a north magnetic pole n pole . the clock
the source of nuclear energy is the mass of nucleus . a small amount of mass of nucleus gets converted into a tremendous amount of energy during a nuclear reaction . the nuclear energy is also known as atomic energy because it can be considered to be coming from the atoms . we will now describe the nuclear reactions of fission and fusion in detail . one by one . let us start with nuclear fission .
construction of an ac generator figure . shows the basic design of an ac generator . the armature of the generator consists of a coil of many turns wound over a soft iron core . the armature is placed between the poles of a strong magnet . the ends of the coil are connected to two cylindrical slip rings . cį and c . mounted on the shaft . each slip ring is permanently in contact with a carbon brush . the brushes are connected to the fixed terminals . p and q . electric devices such as an electric bulb can be connected to these terminals . as shown in the figure .
limitations the rise and fall of water during tides is not high enough to generate electrical energy on a large scale . there are very few places suitable for building dams . it is for these reasons . the tidal energy is not likely to be a major source of energy .
it is worth remembering that the emf induced in the generator depends upon the following factors i the number of turns greater the number of turns greater is the emf induced . ii the strength of the magnetic field stronger the magnetic field greater is the emf induced . iii the speed of rotation greater the speed of rotation greater is the induced emf .
the thumb points gives the direction of motion of the conductor . thus . we can write fleming s left hand rule in another way as follows hold the forefinger . the centre finger and the thumb of your left hand at right angles to one another . adjust your hand in such a way that the forefinger points in the direction of magnetic field and the centre finger points in the direction of current in the conductor . then the direction in which the thumb points gives the direction of motion of the conductor . to memorize fleming s left hand rule we should remember that the forefinger represents the magnetic field both . forefinger and field . start with the same letter f . the centre finger represents current both . centre and current start with letter c . and the thumb represents force or motion both . thumb and motion contain the letter m . we will make the fleming s left hand rule more clear by taking an example .
wun during the charging of cell . when electric current i is forced into the cell . then the terminal voltage across it is measured as v ir
third most energy of all renewable energies . geothermal energy is a renewable resource because it comes from the heat generated by the earth s core . which is practically unlimited . even in places where this energy is dependent on a reservoir of hot water . the amount taken out can be put back in . therefore . making it a sustainable source of energy .
through it and go behind the mirror . so . there is no light coming to the person directly from the image point i . it is only the light reflected from the mirror which appears to be coming from the image point i .
ammonia vapours generator yyyyyyyy noillamano per bebe heat exchanger evaporator turbine e heat exchanger condener pump warm sea water liquid ammonia cold sea water discharge fig . an otec power plant using ammonia .
for series combination of resistors . it is worth noting that . the current is same in every part of the series circuit . . the equivalent resistance is the sum of the individual resistances including the internal resistance of the cell in the circuit . . current in the circuit is independent of the relative positions of the resistors in series . . the equivalent resistance is greater than any individual resistance in the series combination . . the potential drop across each resistor is proportional to its resistance .
activity let us study the nature of the images formed by a concave mirror . first find the approximate focal length f of a concave mirror . as explained before . then fix it vertically on a stand . draw a long straight line on a table and place the mirror stand on it . the pole of the mirror should be exactly above the line . now mark the points f and c on the line . at distances f and f respectively from the mirror . make a small screen of stiff paper and fix it on another stand . the screen should be vertical . with its centre at about the same height as the pole of the mirror . place the screen stand on the line drawn on the table .
 . energy from the sea about of the earth s surface is covered by oceans and other water bodies . this water in the ocean is always moving as waves . thus . the water in the ocean has tremendous kinetic energy . the energy of the ocean water is also present in the form of tides low and high . during full moon and new moon
 iii a ray passing through the centre of curvature in the case of concave mirror . and directed towards the centre of curvature in the case of a convex mirror falls normally zi zr and is reflected back along the same path .
focal length the distance between the pole and the principal focus of the mirror is called the focal length of the mirror . it is denoted by f . the distance pf f represents the focal length of the spherical mirrors i . e . . concave and convex mirrors .
table . substance refractive index . . . . . . . . solids at c ice c fused quartz glass crown canada balsam sodium chloride rock salt glass flint ruby sapphire diamond liquids at c air water ethyl alcohol kerosene oil turpentine oil benzene carbon disulphide . . . . . . . . . 
mass energy equivalence i according to einstein s mass energy equivalence . a mass am can be converted into energy as e amc where c x m s is speed of light in vacuum . ii when mass of amu is converted into energy . then by mass energy equivalence e . x j or e . mev or energy is generated .
blue light from the sun more than they scatter red light . when we look towards the sun at sunset . we see red and orange colours because the blue light has been scattered out and away from the line of sight .
iris it is a dark muscular diaphragm that controls light level inside the eye .
pupil it is the central circular aperture in the iris . its normal diameter is mm but it can contract in excess light and expand in dim light . by means of two sets of involuntary muscular fibres .
demerits box type solar cookers are not much popular because i it takes long time in cooking the food in them . ii they can not be used for baking making chapattis and frying dal .
rotation coil rotation hobbel cecodilecole colegdr u seles otsat baserede misega doo daut beteo boere eredenlerdtlige seseo agos . citroen relerosis det er bose roage . beleid budte beseda aids batrde dia y u cgrego cd udan sous totetto dres les dissoldes eile presse usele sessa dice sepertor escore bros horole songs b eshgan ra gender die eur one rb alternating voltage slip rings alternating voltage slip rings rotate with rotate with r y b . coil coil brushes fixed brushes fixed fig . a and b the two positions of the coils of an ac generator after half a rotation .
side . the reflected rays df and ec are produced backwards as shown by dotted lines . on producing backwards . they appear to intersect at point a behind the concave mirror . thus . a is the virtual image of point a of the object . to get the complete image of the object we draw a b perpendicular to the axis from point a . thus a b is the image of the object ab formed by the concave mirror . now . an eye at position x . sees the reflected rays as if they have come from points a b behind the mirror . since there is no actual intersection of the reflected rays . so the image a b is a virtual image . this image can be seen only by looking into the concave mirror . it cannot be obtained on a screen . we can see from figure that the image is same side up as object both of them have arrow head at the top . so it is an erect image . and if we compare the size of the object ab and its image a b . the image appears to be bigger in size than the object . thus . it is an enlarged image or magnified image . from the above discussion we conclude that when an object is placed between the pole p and focus f of a concave mirror . the image formed is i behind the mirror . ii virtual and erect . and iii larger than the object or magnified .
figure . ii a concave lens is thin in the middle but thicker at the edges . figure b shows a concave lens in
 . the heating effect of electric current is utilised in electric bulbs electric lamps for producing light . when electric current passes through a very thin . high resistance tungsten filament of an electric bulb . the filament becomes white hot and emits light . please note that the same current flowing through the tungsten filament of an electric bulb produces enormous heat but almost negligible heat is produced in the connecting wires of copper . this is because of the fact that the fine tungsten filament has very high resistance whereas copper connecting wires have very low resistance .
the fuse wire must have proper thickness which depends on the maximum current which the household wiring can safely carry . the thickness of the fuse wire should be such that it is able to withstand only a little more current than drawn by the household circuit . fuse wires are rated as a . a . a . a . a . a . a . and so on . it is clear that a ampere fuse wire will be thicker than a ampere fuse wire . the fuse in the lighting and fans circuit of a small house is of amperes rating which means that the
torch activity cos bluish reddish take water in a transparent container which is at least cm long or wide . add two or three drops of milk to the water and shine a powerful torch through the water . look from a side of the container . you will see that the colour of the milk water mixture changes with distance from the torch . near the torch . the colour is milky blue . and at the other end . the colour is orange or red . if you add a few more drops of milk . the colours become darker . look at the face of the torch through the liquid . it will look reddish . water milk fig . the colour of the milk water mixture changes with distance from the torch .
 . a ray of light passing through the centre of curvature after reflection retraces its original path . fig . a and b sham toma d re fig . a ray retraces its path . after reflection . if it passes through the centre of curvature of the mirror .
 f meets at fig . image formation by a convex lens when the object is placed at the focus f .
principle electric motor is based on the principle that a current carrying conductor placed perpendicular to the magnetic field experiences a force .
a horseshoe magnet it is in the form of letter u .
when light rays go from air or vacuum into another medium . then they bend or refract to some extent . now . some media bend the light rays more than the others . the refractive index of a medium gives an indication of the light bending ability of that medium . for example . the refractive index of glass is greater than the refractive index of water . therefore . the light rays bend more on passing from air into glass than from air into water . we will now solve one problem based on refractive index .
 . . ac generator it is similar to a dc generator . with one major difference the slip ring commutator is replaced by slip rings . it converts mechanical energy into alternating electrical energy .
the original value . from this discussion we conclude that a long wire or long conductor has more resistance . and a short wire has less resistance .
a person who is totally colour blind sees the world only in shades of grey . white . and black . similar to a black and white photograph .
fuses of various current capacities are available . remember that thicker the fuse wire . the greater is its current capacity .
 . ampere s swimming rule imagine a man swimming along a wire in the direction of the current with his face towards the needle so that the current enters at his feet and leaves at his head . the north pole of the needle will be deflected towards his left fig . d .
the convex mirror . all the rays shown behind the convex mirror are virtual or unreal and hence they have been represented by dotted lines . in fact . no actual rays can pass through the focus and centre of curvature of a convex mirror .
dispersion of light we see colours all around us . the blue sky . green leaves . red roses . yellow sunflowers . colourful birds and butterflies . etc . . are just some of the colours we see in nature . and then we have the colours of our clothes . pens . pencils . houses . vehicles . and so on . the colours we see depend on the colour of light entering our eyes from an object or a source of light . different sources of light may produce lights of different colours . a sodium vapour lamp . for example . produces a yellowish light . the flame of a gas stove emits blue light . but sunlight does not appear to have a colour . the same is true of certain types of bulbs we use at home . we call such light i . e . . those that appear colourless white light . though white light does not appear coloured . it is actually a mixture of lights of different colours present in a definite proportion . lights of different colours have different wavelengths . so . they behave differently . for example . they travel at different speeds in any material medium . this makes the refractive index of a transparent material slightly different for different colours of lights . so . lights of different colours bend by different amounts on refraction . therefore . under certain conditions . when white light gets refracted . its components bend by different amounts and separate out . you must have seen this happen when sunlight passing through a glass of water falls on the table or the floor . producing a band of colours . the phenomenon of splitting of light into its component colours due to the dependence of refractive index on wavelength is called the dispersion of light .
when the commutator comes in contact with brushes b . and b after rotation . the direction of the current in arms ab and cd is reversed as shown in figure b . the force acting on arm ab is in the downward direction and the force acting on the arm cd is in the upward direction . again these two equal and opposite forces again constitute a couple and again rotates the coil in the clockwise direction . thus . the coil of d . c . motor continues to rotate in the same direction . hence . electrical energy is converted into mechanical energy i . e . . kinetic energy of rotation . the speed of rotation of the motor can be increased by a increasing the strength of the current through the armature . b increasing the number of turns in the coil of the armature . c increasing the area of coil . and d increasing the strength of the magnetic field .
 . an object placed under water appears to be raised we will perform an experiment to show that an object placed under water appears to be raised . this can be done as follows we place a coin at the bottom of an empty basin a shallow vessel . let us move our head away from the basin slowly . till the coin disappears from our view and we cannot see it see
unit of electric energy electrical energy consumed in a circuit is measured in kilowatt hour kwh or board of trade unit b . o . t . u . . this is also termed as a unit of electric energy . one kilowatt hour is defined as the amount of electric energy consumed when a device of power of one kilowatt is used for one hour . kilowatt hour is related to joule as shown below kwh kw x hour w x x s j s x s kwh . x j . . . . 
 isotopes isotopes of an element are the atoms of the element which have the same atomic number but different mass numbers . e . g . h . hº . hº . are the three isotopes of hydrogen .
a small hole was made in the screen on which the entire spectrum was formed such that only the green portion of the spectrum could pass through it . the green wavelength was then allowed to fall on another dispersing prism as shown in figure . . after refraction through the prism this green light was allowed to fall on a screen . it was found that the light obtained on the white screen had the same colour as that of the light falling on the dispersing prism . this showed that the prism does not produce any colour of its own it simply splits the white light into its constituent wavelengths .
 do you know there are million rod cells and million cone cells on the retina . some animals have their two eyes on the opposite sides of head . i . e . . one in the front and other at the back of head . this gives a much wider field of view .
the answer is a phenomenon called electromagnetic induction if magnetic field more appropriately magnetic flux through a circuit changes . a potential difference voltage and a current are induced in a circuit . the potential difference is called induced potential difference and the current is called induced current . in other words . whenever there is relative motion between a conductor and a magnetic field an induced potential or potential difference and induced current is produced . when electromagnetic induction was discovered in the s . it was a mere laboratory curiosity today . thanks to its central role in the generation of electric power . it is fundamentally responsible for the nature of our technological society .
at noon . sun overhead sun shorter distance little of blue light scattered sun appears white away sun on earth sun appears red most of blue light scattered most of blue light scattered away sun mainly red light reaches us observer mainly red light reaches us at sunrise . sun sun appears red at sunset . sun near horizon near horizon much larger distance much larger distance figure . the sun appears red at sunrise and sunset but white at noon .
lens formula for convex and concave lens linear magnification of a lens is defined as the ratio of the size of the image to the size of the object . size of the image size of the object h h
earthing of electrical appliances sometime or the other we have received an electric shock from an electric iron or a room cooler . we will now discuss why we get the electric shock and how it can be prevented . in order to work an electrical
are connected to the two halves of a metallic split ring a ring split in two separate parts . the split ring forms what is called the split ring commutator or simply . commutator . when the shaft rotates . the commutator and the coil rotate with it . two carbon brushes . b and b . press against the two halves . c and c . of the commutator . a potential difference is applied across the brushes by connecting them to a source of dc . for example . a battery .
 two wires of equal length . one of aluminium and the other of copper have the same resistance . which of the two wires is lighter hence explain why aluminium wires are preferred for overhead power cables . pa . m . pcu . x m . relative density of al . . and of cu . .
geothermal energy geothermal energy means energy stored as heat in the earth . you know that below the earth s crust lies a layer called the mantle . the temperature near the upper part of the mantle is around hot spring c . the material here is in a partially geyser molten state and is called magma . in some areas . hot magma swells up into the crust . but remains trapped hot underground below the surface of the earth . such areas in the earth s crust are called hot spots . the rocks and groundwater above these hot spots get heated . at some places . the magma hot water comes to the surface and collects in pools called hot springs . in fig . . geysers and hot springs water
when the object is between f and f . virtual . erect . diminished and on the same side of the lens . f b f b 
ui since the resistance of a wire or conductor is inversely proportional to its area of cross section . therefore . when the area of cross section of a wire is doubled . its resistance gets halved and if the area of cross section of wire is halved . then its resistance will get doubled . we know that a thick wire has a greater area of cross section whereas a thin wire has a smaller area of cross section . this means that a thick wire has less resistance . and a thin wire has more resistance . a thick wire having large area of cross section can be considered equivalent to a large number of thin wires connected in parallel . and we know that if we have two resistance wires connected in parallel . their resultant resistance is halved . so . doubling the area of cross section of a wire will . therefore . halve the resistance . from the m studygear above discussion it is clear that to make resistance wires or resistors do i short length of a thick wire is used for getting low resistance . and ii long length of a thin wire is used for getting high resistance .
shorter by about minutes if the earth had no atmosphere . the sun appears flattened or oval at sunrise and sunset . the apparent flattening of the sun s disc at sunrise and sunset is also due to atmospheric refraction . we will study this in detail in higher classes . before we go further and discuss scattering of light . please answer the following questions 
when light falls on a smooth surface . a part of it gets reflected . figure . shows a ray of light being reflected from a flat . smooth surface . the ray ao is incident on the surface at point o and is reflected along ob . the line on is the normal to the surface at o . this means . on is perpendicular to the surface . the angle aon that the incident ray makes with the normal is called the angle of incidence . commonly denoted by i . and the angle bon that the reflected ray makes with the normal is called the angle of reflection . commonly denoted by r . the reflection of light follows two laws .
the value of current flowing through the nichrome wire ab . the voltmeter reading is noted which gives the potential difference v across the ends of the nichrome wire ab . this gives the first set of v and i reading . let us say vị and . the current in the circuit is now increased step by step by changing the position of the contact point c of the rheostat . record the value of the current by reading the ammeter and the corresponding value of the potential difference by reading the voltmeter in all the cases . the ratio is calculated for all the readings . record your observations . result is the ratio potential difference current calculated for all the readings . it is found that the ratio has almost constant value for all the observations . this verifies ohm s law because this shows that the current is directly proportional to the potential difference .
fig . the normal eye .
conventional and nonconventional sources of energy sources of energy that have been in use for centuries are called conventional sources of energy . conventional sources include wood . coal . petroleum and flowing water . conventional sources like coal and petroleum are nonrenewable . while sources like flowing water are renewable . sources of energy that we have started using in new ways or only in recent times are called nonconventional or alternate sources of energy . these include energy from the sun . the heat inside the earth geothermal energy . tides . ocean waves . etc . nuclear energy is also a nonconventional source . note that nonconventional energy sources are renewable . our government has started giving great attention to these sources . we have been using wind and biomass like cow dung for energy for ages . in that sense they are conventional sources . however . they were not used conventionally to do tasks like electricity generation . which has now been made possible with improvement in technology . in that sense set they can also be called nonconventional sources of energy .
experiment to demonstrate the magnetic effect of current we will now describe oersted s experiment to show that a current carrying wire produces a magnetic field around it . we take a thick insulated copper wire and fix it in such a way that the portion ab of the wire is in the north south direction as shown in figure a . a plotting compass m is placed under the wire ab . the two ends of the wire are connected to a battery through a switch . when no current is flowing in the wire ab . the compass needle is parallel to the wire ab and points in the usual north south direction figure a . m studygear o north north so zato current š plotting compass needle gets deflected switch compass b south south a b figure . experiment to show that an electric current produces a magnetic effect . let us pass the electric current through wire ab by pressing the switch . on passing the current we find that compass needle is deflected from its north south position as shown in figure b . and when the current is switched off . the compass needle returns to its original position . we know that a freely pivoted compass needle always sets itself in the north south direction . it deflects from its usual north south direction only when it is acted upon by another magnetic field . so . the deflection of compass needle by the current carrying wire in the above experiment shows that an electric current produces a magnetic field around it . it is this magnetic field which deflects the compass needle placed near the current carrying wire .
working of an ac generator to generate electricity . the shaft . on which the coil is mounted . is rotated . in figure . a . the arm ab of the coil is moving down . while the arm dc is moving up . fleming s right hand rule will show that the current in the coil is along dcba . from a . the current flows to d via c . b . p . q . b and c . so . the current through the bulb is from p to q . figure . b shows the situation after half a rotation . the arm ab is now moving up and the arm dc is moving down . this causes the current to flow along abcd . from d . the current flows to a via c . b . q . p . b and c . so . the current through the bulb is from q to a . thus . as the direction of the current in the arms of the coil changes with each half rotation . the direction of the current through the bulb changes . in other words . an alternating current flows through the bulb .
if we look at the screen on the front side of the glass tank containing colloidal solution of sulphur . we will see a red patch on the screen . this is because mainly the red colour of the beam of white light reaches the screen after passing through the colloidal sulphur solution in the glass tank the blue colour being scattered away and hence eliminated on the way . this is how the sun looks red at sunrise and sunset when mainly the red colour of sunlight reaches our eyes after the elimination of blue colour through scattering along the way . we are now in a position to answer the following questions 
in the past . wind energy was used through windmills to pump water or lift water from a well and to grind wheat into flour . this happened as follows when the blades of windmill rotate by the force of wind . a shaft connected to them also rotates . this rotating shaft was made to run a water pump to lift water from a well by a suitable mechanism . it could also turn the mill stones of a flour mill . the traditional use of wind energy has now been modified by the improvement in technology to generate electricity through wind powered generators . this is explained below .
reflection is of two types i diffuse reflection or irregular reflection and ii specular reflection or regular reflection . while studying the reflection of light we consider light to be a ray . a ray of light represents the direction of the propagation of light i . e . . light travels in the direction of the ray of light .
if в be the reference point . the potential at b is vb . from equation . . the potential at a is va w q . so . the potential at a point is the work done per unit charge in taking a charge to that point from a chosen reference point . equation . may also be written as w qv . . . . . the work done on the charge q is stored as the electric potential energy u of the group of charges . so . u qv . . . . . unit of potential difference the unit of potential difference and potential is the volt . whose symbol is v . the volt is named in honour of the italian physicist alessandro volta . if joule of work is done in taking coulomb of charge from one point to another . the potential difference between the points is volt . v w joule v volt . q coulomb the potential difference between two points is sometimes also called the voltage .
 . effect of temperature it has been found that the resistance of all pure metals increases on raising the temperature and decreases on lowering the temperature . but the resistance of alloys like manganin . constantan and nichrome is almost unaffected by temperature .
 . the second law of refraction gives a relationship between the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction . this relationship was discovered by snell experimentally in . so the second law of refraction is called snell s law of refraction . according to snell s law of refraction of light the ratio of sine of angle of incidence to the sine of angle of refraction is constant for a given pair of media such as air and glass or air and water . that is sine of angle of incidence constant sine of angle of refraction sin i or sin r constant
formation of image light is bent by refractions at the cornea and the lens such that a sharp image is formed on the retina . the crystalline lens is made up of jellylike . fibrous substances that make it elastic . the ciliary muscles . to which the lens is attached . can alter the curvature and thickness of the lens . the average of the refractive indices of the materials of the lens is about . . the liquids in front of and behind the lens have a refractive index of about . . when light enters the eye from air . most of the bending occurs at the cornea itself because of the sharp change in refractive index . the difference in the refractive indices of the lens and the liquids surrounding it being smaller . light bends less at the lens . so . the lens just provides a kind of fine tuning . the cornea lens fluid system is equivalent to a single converging lens . which we shall call the eye lens . since the ciliary muscles can change the curvature of the crystalline lens . it in effect can change the focal length of the eye lens .
inwards whereas the force on cd acts outwards . these forces form a couple and hence apply a torque pair of forces on the coil that turns it . this is because the direction of current in the two sides is opposite to each other . eventually . the coil reaches the position shown in fig . b . in this position . the half rings momentarily lose electrical contact with the brushes . so that there is no current in the coil and no applied torque . however . like any moving object . the rotating coil does not stop immediately . for its inertia of motion carries it onward . when the half rings re establish contact with the brushes . there again is a current in the coil and a magnetic torque again rotates the coil in the same direction . this time the force on ab acts outwards and that on cd acts inwards . but this time the rings are in contact with different brushes . ring r . comes in contact with brush b and ring r comes in contact with brush bi .
colours of the sun you must have noticed that the colour of the sun changes during the day . at noon . when the sun is directly overhead . the distance ab travelled by sunlight through the atmosphere is short as compared to other times figure . . so . sunlight comes across lesser number of particles . resulting in lesser scattering . thus . around noon . the sun looks close to its actual colour . i . e . . white . at sunset or sunrise . sunlight has to travel a larger distance . cb . so . it comes across more number of particles which scatter mostly the bluish lights . thus . the light reaching our eyes has more of the reddish lights . this makes the sun look orange or red . earth fig . . sunlight travels through a large distance through the atmosphere when the sun is at the horizon .
do you know the distance of image from an object placed midway between two parallel plane mirrors ml where is the distance between two parallel plane mirrors and m . . . . . . . a thick plane mirror forms number of images due to multiple reflection of light . out of these images . second image is the brightest and intensity of other images goes on decreasing .
nuclear fission in about power plants worldwide . electricity is produced from the energy liberated in a special type of nuclear reaction called nuclear fission . the word fission means to split or break up into parts . nuclear fission is a reaction in which a heavy nucleus splits into two middleweight nuclei . releasing a lot of energy . the process of a heavy nucleus splitting into two middleweight nuclei is called nuclear fission . one of the isotopes of uranium is u is its mass number . i . e . . the sum of the number of neutrons and protons . the nucleus of u can be used to start a nuclear fission reaction by bombarding it with slow moving neutrons . in this process . u itself does not undergo fission . it converts to u . which is highly unstable . as soon as it forms . u splits in two parts . i . e . . it fissions . some neutrons . generally or . are also emitted in this process . the nuclei of the elements formed by fission are unstable . they disintegrate further to form stable nuclei . gamma ray electromagnetic radiation and particles such as neutrons and electrons are emitted by the nuclei at different stages between the fission and the creation of stable nuclei . 
if a coil of copper tube painted black from outside is placed in a box similar to that of solar cooker . it will work as a solar water heater . this is because when water is passed through the copper coil . it will absorb sun s heat rays and become hot . solar water heaters are used to supply hot water in big buildings like hotels and hospitals . a solar water heater cannot be used to get hot water during the night or on a cloudy day . let us solve one problem now .
if bulbs of different wattages are joined in parallel . then highest wattage bulb glows with maximum brightness . if bulbs of different wattages are joined in series . then lowest wattage bulb glows with maximum brightness .
a cell provides a constant potential difference the potential difference provided by things like charged spheres reduces to zero quickly once charges start to flow . so . we have to use cells to provide constant potential difference for a long time . cells have chemicals inside . reactions in the cell cause positive and negative charges to gather separately . this creates a potential difference between the terminals of the cell . the
convex lens a converging lens can be supposed to be made up of a number of prisms with the base of each prism towards the centre of the lens . the central portion of the lens is a simple parallel sided glass slab which allows the ray of light to pass undeviated . as can be seen from figure . . the prisms in the upper part of the lens . deviate the rays of light towards their base i . e . . downwards whereas the prisms in the lower part of the lens deviate the rays towards their base i . e . . upwards . these rays converge at a point on the other side of the lens . this point is called the focus of the lens . thus . a concave lens converges a parallel beam of light incident on it .
potential difference the potential difference p . d . between two points in an electric field is defined as the amount of work done in moving a unit positive charge from one point to the other point . if w is the amount of work done in bringing a unit charge from one point to the other point then the potential difference va vb between two points is given by work done w potential difference va vb av charge av va vb the si unit of potential difference is volt which is denoted by v . one volt is the potential difference between two points in a current carrying conductor when joule of work is done to move a charge of coulomb from one point to the other .
case refraction of light when it goes from a rarer medium to a denser medium
electromagnet an iron nail or a bolt will not attract other iron or steel objects . but what happens if they are placed inside a solenoid carrying a current let us find out .
the images formed by the two surfaces of the spoon are similar to those formed by curved mirrors . we shall now learn about some types of curved mirrors .
force on current carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field we have already described oersted s experiment which shows that a current carrying wire exerts a force on a compass needle and deflects it from its usual north south position . since a compass needle is actually a small freely pivoted magnet . we can also say that a current carrying wire exerts a mechanical force on a magnet . and if the magnet is free to move . this force can produce a motion in the magnet . the reverse of this is also true . that is . a magnet exerts a mechanical force on a current carrying wire . and if the wire is free to move . this force can produce a motion in the wire see figure . in fact . this result can be obtained by applying
it is also due to atmospheric refraction that we can still see the sun for about minutes even after the sun has set below horizon . from the above discussion we conclude that we can see the sun minutes before the actual sunrise time and for minutes after the actual sunset time . so . the time from sunrise to sunset is lengthened by about minutes because of atmospheric refraction . thus . the day would have been
solar energy the energy received from the sun is called solar energy . the sun is the ultimate source of energy of fossil fuels . flowing water . wind . biomass and ocean waves .
light is incident normally on a mirror . it means that it is travelling along the normal to the mirror . so . the angle of incidence i for such a ray of light is zero . and since the angle of incidence is zero . therefore . according to the second law of reflection . its angle of reflection r will also be zero . this means that a ray of light which is incident normally or perpendicularly on a mirror . is reflected back along the same path because the angle of incidence as well as the angle of reflection for such a ray of light are zero . for example . in figure . a ray of light falls on the plane mirror along the normal no . therefore . it will be reflected along the same path on . so . in this case . the incident ray ay will be no and the reflected ray will be on . in other words . the same line il be on . in other words . the same line represents incident ray . normal and reflected ray . we should . however . put two arrow heads on the same normal line pointing in opposite directions one arrow to represent incident ray and the other arrow to represent reflected ray as shown in figure .
the converging and the diverging lens are further of following types convex lenses . meniscus . . planoconvex . . double convex or bi convex figure . shows the different types of converging lenses . the double or bi convex lens has both the surface convex . the planoconvex has one convex surface and one plane surface while the convex meniscus or concavo convex lens has one surface concave and the other convex . all these lenses are thicker in the middle and thinner at the edges .
the lens systems consisting of several lenses in contact are used in designing the optical instruments like cameras . microscopes and telescopes . etc . the use of a combination of lenses increases the sharpness of the image . the image produced by using a combination of lenses is also free from many defects which otherwise occur while using a single lens . we will now solve a problem based on combination of lenses .
 water is also an optically denser medium than air . so when a ray of light goes from air into water . it bends towards the normal . thus . the refraction of light on going from air to water is similar to the refraction of light from air to glass which has been shown in figure . to show the path of a ray of light going from air into water . we can use figure but we will have to write water in
with metal ends fig . . the fuses used for domestic purposes are rated as a . a . a . a . a . etc . for an electric iron which consumes kw electric power when operated at v . a current of a . that is . . a will flow in the circuit . in this case . a a fuse must be used . the fuse rating is the maximum safe current permitted to flow in a fuse before it blows off . this saves the electrical device from damage .
power of a combination of lenses if a number of lenses are placed in close contact . then the power of the combination of lenses is equal to the algebraic sum of the powers of individual lenses . thus . if two lenses of powers p and p are placed in contact with each other . then their resultant power p is given by p p p for example . if a convex lens of power . d and a concave lens of power . d are placed in contact with each other . then their resultant power will be p p p d this shows that a combination of convex lens of power d and a concave lens of power . d has a resultant power of . d . so . this combination of convex lens and concave lens behaves like a concave lens of power . dioptres . this is shown clearly in the figure given below 
 . construction of ray diagrams each point on an object emits light rays in all directions . and when some of these rays pass through a lens . they form an image . as with mirrors . ray diagrams can be drawn to determine the location and size of the image .
also explains the use of a concave mirror as a shaving mirror . when the face is placed close to a concave mirror so that the face is within its focus the concave mirror produces a magnified large and erect image of the face . since a large image of the face is seen in the concave mirror . it becomes easier to make a smooth shave . thus . while using a concave mirror as a shaving mirror . the face should be close to the concave mirror . for the same reason . concave mirrors are also used as make up mirrors by women for putting on make up such as painting eye lashes see figure b . in order to use a concave mirror as a make up mirror . the face is held close to the concave mirror so that it lies within the focus of concave mirror . dentists use concave mirrors to see the large image of the teeth for examining the teeth of a person see figure c . for this purpose . the dentist holds a small concave mirror in such a way that the tooth lies within its focus . a magnified image of the tooth is then seen by the dentist in the concave mirror . since the tooth looks much bigger . it becomes easy to examine the defect in the tooth .
equivalent resistance of parallel combination in the circuit is given by r or r now and are connected in series . therefore . net resistance . lil wh
we draw a b perpendicular to the axis . so . a b is the image of the object ab placed at infinity . we find that the image is formed at the focus f of the convex mirror behind the mirror . it is virtual . erect and highly diminished much smaller than the object . from the above discussion we conclude that when an object is at infinity from a convex mirror . the image formed is i behind the mirror at focus f . ii virtual and erect . and my studygear iii highly diminished much smaller than the object . dd
principal axis mirror formula mirror formula for concave mirror object distance measured from p to a pa u object on the left to the mirror image distance measured from p to a pa v image on the left of the mirror focal length measured from p to f pf f focus on the left of the mirror in similar triangle a b f and triangle nxf a b fa a p fp cami for mirror of small aperture n is near p . fn fp nxfn fp putting values . with proper sign a b f v f nx f f in similar triangles a b p and abp zaʼpb zapb a b a p v v abap u u but . nx ab hence . from equations i and ii . º cross multiplying . uv ufr vf transposing . vf uf uv changing sign and dividing by uvf . we get u f the relation between the position of object u . position of image v and focal length f of mirror is called mirror formula . a it is expressed as it is expressed as o u f mirror formula is valid in all situations for all spherical mirrors for all positions of the object . you must use the sign convention while substituting numerical values for u . v . f and r in the mirror formula for solving problems .
 . nuclear fusion the word fusion means to join or to combine . the process in which two nuclei of light elements like that of hydrogen combine to form a heavy nucleus like that of helium . is called nuclear fusion . a tremendous amount of energy is produced during the fusion process . we know that the nuclei of atoms are positively charged . so . when two nuclei are brought together . they repel each other due to their similar charges . due to this a lot of initial heat energy and high pressure are required to force the lighter nuclei to fuse together to form a bigger nucleus . so . the conditions needed for carrying out nuclear fusion process are millions of degrees of temperature and millions of pascals of pressure . in other words . nuclear fusion is carried out by heating the lighter atoms to extremely high temperatures under extremely high pressure . there is some loss of mass during the fusion process which appears as a tremendous amount of energy . here is an example of nuclear fusion reaction .
it is obvious that we should have some device which may disconnect the electricity supply when a short circuit or overloading occurs so that the electric fires are prevented in our homes . to avoid this danger of electric fires we use an electric fuse in the wiring . so . when a building is wired . the wiring is protected by fuses . we will now describe what a fuse is and how it works .
 . . . limitations of wind energy although wind energy has many advantages . it also has its limitations . following are the limitations of wind energy . wind has a very low energy density . . favourable winds are available only in a few geographical areas away from cities . the velocity required for a windmill to function is about km h . backup facilities needed to take care of energy needs in the absence of winds . . direction of wind changes and is never the same . . wind farms require flat . vacant land free from forests . . the construction cost of wind farms is very high . . a wind farm requires a high degree of maintenance .
direct use involves using the heat in the water directly without a heat pump or power plant . this is used for heating buildings . industrial processes . greenhouses . fish farms . food processing facilities . gold mining operations . and a variety of other applications . this direct use of geothermal energy in homes and commercial operations results in savings of upto per cent over fossil fuels .
light a candle and place it between f and c . the flame of the candle should be at about the same height as the pole of the mirror . move the screen back and forth till you see an inverted . enlarged and sharp image of the flame on the screen . does the image match the description given at d in table . keep the candle at different positions and try to get its image on the screen . see if you can verify the other entries of table . .
magnetic field lines a line such that the tangent at any point on it gives the direction of the magnetic field at that point is called a magnetic field line or magnetic line of force .
house wiring there are two systems of wiring by which the power is distributed to a house a the tree system b the ring system . we shall be describing the tree system of wiring though the ring system is rapidly replacing the tree system . in tree system of wiring . different branch lines are taken out from the distribution board to different parts of the house in much the same way as the branches from the trunk of a tree . each branch line is taken to a room through a fuse in the live wire .
regular reflection and diffuse reflection of light in regular reflection . a parallel beam of incident light is reflected as a parallel beam in one direction . in this case . parallel incident rays remain parallel even after reflection and go only in one direction see figure . regular reflection of light occurs from smooth surfaces like that of a plane mirror or highly polished metal surfaces . for example . when a parallel beam of light falls on the smooth surface of a plane mirror . it is reflected as a parallel beam in only one direction as shown in figure . thus . a plane mirror produces regular reflection of light . images are formed by regular reflection of light . for example . a
 . the rubber pipe connecting the gas cylinder to gas stove should be checked regularly for any wear and tear . . the gas cylinder should be handled with care to avoid any damage to the cylinder valve . . close the cylinder value when the gas stove is not in use . . while lighting the gas stove . first open the cylinder regulator valve and then turn the knob of the gas stove .
the collection of coloured components produced by splitting light is called spectrum .
 . non renewable sources of energy those sources of energy which have accumulated in nature over a very . very long time and cannot be quickly replaced when exhausted are called non renewable sources of energy . for example . coal is a non renewable source of energy because coal has accumulated in the earth over a very . very long time . and if all the coal gets exhausted . it cannot be produced quickly in nature see figure . the non renewable sources of energy are fossil fuels coal . petroleum and natural gas . and nuclear fuels such as uranium . non renewable sources of energy are dug out from the earth .
 i the object is always placed towards the left of the mirror such that light propagates from the left towards the right side .
activity verification of ohm s law take four or five dry cells . a thin wire ab . a voltmeter . an ammeter . a plug key and some thick connecting wires . connect the circuit as shown in figure . a . using one cell . the plug key allows you to switch off the current when not required . the wire becomes quite hot when current passes through it for some time . this drains the cell as well . therefore . insert the key into the plug to switch on the current only when taking measurements . the ammeter measures the current i through the circuit . and the voltmeter measures the potential difference v between the ends a and b of the wire . note these values . now connect two cells in series in the circuit . as shown in figure . b . you will find that the reading of the voltmeter increases . indicating the fact that a larger potential difference has been applied across the wire ab . you will also find that the reading of the ammeter increases as well . note down the new values of v and i . repeat the experiment by connecting in series three celis . four cells . and so on . in each case measure the potential difference and the current . if you calculate v i for each . you will find that it is almost the same . so . v i r is a constant . which is another way of stating ohm s law . here . ris the resistance of the wire ab . if you plot a graph of the current i against the potential difference v . it will be a straight line figure . c . this shows that the current is proportional to the potential difference . a b fig . . 
 . radius of curvature it is the radius of the spherical surfaces which form the lens .
to produce a strong magnetic field . a large number of conductors are placed parallel to each other .
an electric motor is different from an electric generator . a generator converts mechanical energy kinetic energy into electrical energy while an electric motor converts electrical energy into mechanical energy kinetic energy . the construction of a dc motor and a dc dynamo is same . as such one can be used as the other .
examples of tyndall effect are i when a beam of sunlight enters a dusty room through a window . then path becomes visible to us . ii when sun light comes down through the clouds . iii when sunlight passes through a canopy of a dense forest . tiny water droplets in the mist scatter light .
electric power when an electric current flows through a conductor . electrical energy is used up and we say that the current is doing work . we know that the rate of doing work is called power . so electric power is the electrical work done per unit time . that is . work done time taken p wer or
 iii smaller than the object or diminished . figure shows the action of a simple camera lens in producing a small . real and inverted image of an object on the film . a simple camera has a convex lens in it . the object to be photographed is at a distance of more than twice the focal length of the convex lens . the convex lens forms a real . inverted and small image diminished image of the object on the film .
 iii remove the prism and draw a normal n pn at the point p on the side ab . iv draw a line op making an angle with n p . fix pins on the op line not less than cm apart . v place the prism on its position . vi look through face ac for image of the two pins . fix two pins on the side ac of the prism such that they appear in line with the images of the pins on the side ab . vii remove the prism and join qr to get emergent ray . viii produce qr backward so as to meet op produced at point m . ix measure angle of deviation zlmq . x find the angle of deviation for different values of the angle of incidence xi mark the angle of incidence i the angle of refraction r and the angle of emergence e as shown in fig . .
nuclear plants flowing water is more reliable than wind hydroelectricity can be generated on a large scale from a single plant dams built for hydroelectric plants also help in flood control and irrigation small hydroelectric plants are best options for generating electricity from renewable sources . as they do not affect the environment much disadvantages large dams affect the plants and animals of the region large hydroelectric power plants are expensive to build not all rivers and areas are suitable for hydroelectric power generation
reflection of light when light falls on the surface of an object . some of it is sent back . the process of sending back the light rays which fall on the surface of an object . is called reflection of light . the reflection of light is shown in figure . when a beam of light ao falls on a mirror at point o . it is sent back by the mirror in another direction ob see figure . and we say that the mirror has reflected the beam of light falling on it . we can compare the reflection of light to the bouncing back of a tennis ball on hitting a wall . for example . if we throw a tennis ball at a wall . the ball bounces back . this means that the wall sends it back . similarly . when light falls on the surface of an object . the object sends the light back . and we say that the object
object at distance more than focal length and less than twice the focal length real object ab has its image a b formed beyond distance f . the image is real . inverted and enlarged bigger in size than the object f b convex lens object between fand f . image beyond f
 ii from point b . we draw an incident ray bf perpendicular to the mirror . this will be reflected back along the same path . giving the reflected ray fb . another incident ray bg is reflected along gh making the angle of reflection r equal to the angle of incidence iz . we produce the two reflected rays fb and gh backwards by dotted lines . they meet at point b b dash . so . b is the virtual image of the bottom point b of the object
le r . an object is placed at a long distance in front of a convex mirror of radius of curvature cm . state the position of its image . ans . here . object distance . u o infinite radius of curvature . r cm sign convention focal length . f cm image distance . v l using mirror formula . or u v f v we get . or v cm . the image is formed at a distance cm to the right of the mirror . the image lies at focus . a . f u
geothermal energy geothermal energy is the energy stored as heat in the earth . it heats rocks and water below the ground . above hot spots . dry steam or a mixture of steam and hot water come out . the steam can be used directly to turn turbines . at other places . different methods are used to get steam from the underground hot water .
far sightedness hypermetropia some people cannot see nearby objects clearly . although they can see distant objects clearly . this defect is called far sightedness . long sightedness . hypermetropia or hyperopia . it arises mainly due to two reasons . a in some people . the eyeball becomes shorter than the normal . as a result . the distance of the retina from the crystalline lens decreases . then . even for the minimum focal length of the eye lens . i . e . . when the ciliary muscles are most contracted . the image of a nearby object is formed behind the retina figure . a . thus . nearby objects cannot be seen clearly . b this defect can also occur if the eye lens has a focal length that is larger than the normal due to abnormal curvatures of the cornea or the crystalline lens .
prism prism is a homogenous transparent refracting medium bounded by at least two non parallel surfaces inclined at some angle . the two plane surfaces pqbd and prcd are called as refracting faces .
competition window coulomb s law the law was put forward by charles augustin de coulomb . a french physicist in . it states that the force of interaction between any two point charges at rest is directly proportional to the product of the charges and inversely proportional to the square of distance between them . the force acts along the line joining the charges . it is an attractive force if the bodies are oppositely charged and repulsive if the bodies have the same type of charge on them . the force is affected by the intervening medium between the charge . let and are the two point charges at rest separated by a distance r in vacuum or air . the point charges approximation can be met
fossil fuels fuels that originated from the remains of dead plants and animals are called fossil fuels . coal . petroleum and natural gas are fossil fuels . these are conventional . nonrenewable fuels . burning them causes air pollution . the pollutants produced include carbon dioxide . carbon monoxide . oxides of nitrogen . sulphur dioxide and unburnt particles . the oxides of nitrogen and sulphur cause acid rain . natural gas is the cleanest fossil fuel .
solar energy the earth receives a huge amount of energy from the sun . each square metre of the earth s upper atmosphere receives about . kilojoules kj of solar energy per second . in other words . solar energy is incident at the rate of . kw m² .
activity cut two slits on a stiff piece of paper . make it stand by fixing it over a window cut on one side of a cardboard box . remove the opposite side of the box and let sunlight or torchlight fall on the slits to create rays . place a cylindrical tumbler filled with water in the path of the rays . you will find that the direction of the rays change after refraction . we use the refraction at a curved surface to make lenses . emergent fays incident ray fig . . 
the line joining the two centres of curvature of a lens is called its principal axis . in a thin lens . rays incident parallel to the principal axis after passing through the lens converge to or appear to diverge from a point on the principal axis . this point is called the second principal focus of the thin lens . if the rays diverging from a point or converging towards a point become parallel to the principal axis after transmission through the lens . the point is called the first principal focus of the lens . the two principal focii are at the same distance from the lens and this distance is called its focal length .
 . this natural renewable energy can be stored in high level reservoirs and can be used whenever required which is not the case with wind energy and solar energy . . the dams constructed to store water . help in controlling floods and in irrigation
in figure . a . h . is positive but he is negative . in figure . b . both h . and he are positive . why is this sign convention called the coordinate convention it is called so because if . by convention . we always keep the object to the left of the pole and above the principal axis . the signs of the quantities u . v . f and r follow the same rules followed for representing the x coordinates of points using coordinate axes . you can think of the pole as the origin . the principal axis as the x axis and a line perpendicular to it as the y axis . the left to right direction is taken as the positive direction of the x axis . then you can think of u . v . f and r as the x coordinates of the object . image . focus and centre of curvature respectively . thus . if any of these is to the left of the pole origin . its x coordinate is negative . similarly . if any of these is to the right of the pole . its x coordinate is positive . since the object . by convention . is always placed to the left of the mirror . its x coordinate u is always negative . in both cases shown in figure . . u pa . in figure . a . the image a . the focus f and the centre of curvature c are all to the left of the origin p . so . v . f and r are also negative . and are equal to pa . pf and pc respectively . in figure . b . the image is to the right of the origin . hence . its x coordinate v is positive . similarly . f and r are also positive .
electromagnet . when an electric current is passed through a solenoid that has a core of a magnetic material like iron . the core becomes an electromagnet . the magnetism disappears when the current is stopped . the poles can be switched by reversing the direction of the current . the cores of electromagnets use soft magnetic materials like soft iron . this is to ensure that the electromagnet loses its magnetism once the current is switched off . permanent magnets are made of hard magnetic materials like alnico .
faraday s experiment the experimental arrangement used by faraday consists of a coil . c of a few turns . a sensitive galvanometer . g connected in series with the coil . faraday observe the following points .
need for earthing of electrical appliances many electric appliances of daily use like electric press . heater . toaster . refrigerator . table fan etc . have a metallic body . if the insulation of any of these appliances melts and makes contact with the metallic casing . the person touching it is likely to receive a severe electric shock . this is due to the reason that the metallic casing will be at the same potential as the applied one . obviously . the electric current will flow through the body of the person who touches the appliance . to avoid such serious accidents . the metal casing of the electric appliance is earthed . since the earth does not offer any resistance . the current flows to the earth through the earth wire instead of flowing through the body of the person . also . due to very low resistance almost nil offered by the earth wire . the current in the circuit rises to a very high value . thereby melting fuse in that circuit and cutting off its electric supply .
 . now . connect a voltmeter in the circuit . as shown in figure . a . close the key and note the potential difference v across the series combination of resistors . then connect the voltmeter across ri figure . b and note the reading v . similarly . connect the voltmeter across r . and r . one at a time . and measure the potential differences v and v across them . fig . . you will find that v v . v v . so . the potential difference across the combination of resistors connected in series is equal to the sum of the potential differences across the individual resistors .
used to make integrated circuits ics . ics are used in all sorts of electronic devices . including computers . tvs . modern telephones . etc .
 . power rating of electrical devices domestic electrical appliances such as electric bulb . electric iron . geyser . room heater etc . work on heating effect of current and are rated in terms of voltage and wattage . the coils of these devices are made of a material of a very high resistance . for instance . nichrome or tungsten . such that when a current passes through the coil . heat is generated .
white colour of clouds we know that if the size of the scattering particles is large enough . than the scattered light may even appear white . clouds are generally at lower heights of the atmosphere and lower atmosphere contains large dust particles and water droplets which scatter all colours or wavelength and clouds generally appear white .
energy . as you know . is the capacity to do work . you also know that in a given situation when all forms of energy are taken into account . the total energy remains constant . energy can neither be created nor destroyed it can only be changed from one form to another . yet you hear about energy production . energy crisis . need to conserve energy . and so on . the term energy used in these has a slightly different meaning . in these expressions . we refer to the energy in a useful form that we can use to cook . operate machines and appliances . run vehicles . and so on . we cannot put to use the energy available from every source . we can only put to use energy from specific sources . which we call sources of energy . for example . the potential energy of a rock high up on a hill cannot be used to cook food . but the chemical energy in cooking gas liquefied petroleum gas . lpg can . so . the rock is not a source of energy . but lpg is . some common sources of energy include firewood . coal . petroleum . natural gas . flowing water and uranium . we also use the energy of the sun and the wind . so . they are also energy sources .
then by ohm s law . the potential drop across each resistor is given by vi ir . v ir and v i rz . since v is the total potential difference in the circuit . therefore . by conservation of energy . we have v v v v . . . . substituting for v v and v in equation . . we have v i r i r i r . . . if rg is the equivalent resistance of the series combination . then by ohm s law . we have v irs . . . . therefore . from equations . and . . we have i rs i r i r i rz hence . rs r r rz . . . . thus . in series combination the equivalent resistance is the sum of the three individual resistances .
concave mirror its focus is situated in front of the mirror . . its radius of curvature and the focal length are negative . . the incident rays are reflected from its concave surface . . its convex side is polished . the image distance for this may be positive or negative because the real image is formed in front of the mirror and virtual image is formed behind the mirror . the image formed by it may be erect . inverted magnified or smaller . . its field of view is narrow . concave mirrors are used as make up mirrors . as reflectors . for medical purposes in light houses in seas . in ophthalmoscope . in torch for hunting purpose .
of force on the current carrying wire has been reversed . from this we conclude that the direction of force on a current carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field can be reversed by reversing the direction of current flowing in the conductor . keeping the direction of current unchanged . if we reverse the direction of magnetic field applied in figure by turning the magnet m so that its poles are reversed . even then the wire swings backwards showing that the direction of force acting on it has been reversed . thus . the direction of force on a current carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field can also be reversed by reversing the direction of magnetic field .
white light is a mixture of coloured lights . the phenomenon of splitting of light into its component colours due to the dependence of refractive index on wavelength is called the dispersion of light . a prism causes light to be split into its component colours . the angle through which a ray of light turns on passing through a prism is called the angle of deviation . the collection of coloured components produced by splitting of light is called spectrum .
given the range of fuels we have today . what are the factors which would limit our choices when it comes to a particular task like cooking our food would the fuel selected also depend on the work to be done for example . would we choose one fuel for cooking and another for heating the room in winter or cooling the room in summer for a fuel to be good the following characteristics are important i it should be capable of providing adequate useful energy . ii it should be easily accessible . iii it should be convenient to use . iv it should be easy to transport and store . v it should be able to deliver desired quantity of energy at a steady rate . vi it should be economical . vii it should cause minimum pollution .
ciliary muscles contracted the eye lens is slightly thick and its focal length is short rays from a a near object image on the retina cm
 axis axis inwards inwards b outwards outwards rt r a b 
when deuterium atoms heavy hydrogen atoms of mass number are heated to an extremely high temperature under extremely high pressure . then two deuterium nuclei combine together to form a heavy nucleus of helium . and a neutron is emitted . a tremendous amount of energy is liberated in this fusion reaction . this fusion reaction can be written as fusion įh h two deuterium atoms light atoms tremendous amount of energy he one helium atom heavy atom ón neutron
coal description coal is a naturally occurring black mineral . it is a mixture of free carbon and carbon compounds containing hydrogen . nitrogen . oxygen and sulphur . it is not only a good fuel but also source of many organic compound .
at hydroelectric power house . the generator is driven by the power of fast flowing water released from a dam across a river . in thermal power house . the generator is driven by the power of high pressure steam . the heat energy for making steam from water comes from burning coal . natural gas or oil . at nuclear power house . the heat energy for making steam comes from nuclear reactions taking place inside the nuclear reactor . the high pressure steam turns a turbine . the turbine turns the generator . and the generator converts mechanical energy or kinetic energy into electrical energy or electricity . this electricity is then supplied to our homes .
when newton performed this experiment . he proved that the colour was not added by the prism . but the colours were present in white light and the glass prism served simply to separate the colours .
we will also be using rays of light in constructing the ray diagrams . a ray of light is the straight line along which light travels . the arrow head put on the straight line tells us the direction in which the light is travelling . a bundle of light rays is called a beam of light . we will now study the reflection of light from the plane surfaces like that of a plane mirror . this is necessary to understand the reflection of light from spherical mirrors .
a fuse is a safety device having a short length of a thin . tin plated copper wire having low melting point . which melts and breaks the circuit if the current exceeds a safe value . the thickness and length of the fuse wire depends on the maximum current allowed through the circuit . an electric fuse works on the heating effect of current . the fuse for protecting our domestic wiring is fitted just above our main switch on the switch board . a fuse wire is connected in series in the electric circuits .
 . the heating effect of electric current is utilised in electric fuse for protecting household wiring and electrical appliances . a fuse is a short length of a thin tin plated copper wire having low melting point . the thin fuse wire has a higher resistance than the rest of the electric wiring in a house . so . when the current in a household electric circuit rises too much due to some reason . then the fuse wire gets heated too much . melts and breaks the circuit due to which the current stops flowing . this prevents the fire in house due to over heating of wiring and also prevents damage to various electrical appliances in the house due to excessive current flowing through them . thus . an electric fuse is a very important application of the
principle of generation of hydroelectricity potential energy of water stored in a dam is converted into kinetic energy of the falling water . the water falls on the turbine . so kinetic energy of the flowing water is converted into the kinetic energy of the armature of the generator connected to the turbine . then kinetic energy is converted into the electrical energy known as hydroelectricity .
 . large eco systems are destroyed when land is submerged under the water of reservoir of a dam . the construction of dam on a river also disturbs the ecological balance in the downstream area of the river . for example . due to the construction of dam there are no annual floods in the river . and because of this the soil of downstream region does not get nutrient rich silt . this decreases the fertility of soil in the downstream area and finally the crop yields also decrease .
the si unit of resistance is ohm which is denoted by the symbol omega . . the unit of resistance ohm . can be defined by using ohm s law as described below . according to ohm s law potential difference resistance a constant current that is . r so . resistance . r now . if the potential difference v is volt and the current i is ampere . then resistance r in the above equation becomes ohm . volt that is . ohm ampere this gives us the following definition for ohm ohm is the resistance of a conductor such that when a potential difference of volt is applied to its ends . a current of ampere flows through it . we can find out the resistance of a conductor by using ohm s law equation r . this will become more clear from the following examples .
experiment to study the scattering of light we will now perform an experiment to understand how the scattering of light leads to the blue colour of the sky . and the red appearance of the sun at sunrise and sunset . in this experiment we will prepare a colloidal solution containing tiny particles of sulphur required for scattering the light by the action of sulphuric acid on sodium thiosulphate solution .
apparatus a cell of . v . a bulb . a key . connecting wires . procedure join one end of a connecting wire to the negative terminal of the cell . join its other end to one end of the socket of the bulb . join the other end of the socket with the wire to one end of the key .
mirror downward height ve direction of incident light upward height ve object is placed in front of the mirror against the direction of incident light negative distance in the direction of incident light positive distance
by saying that the object is at the focus of a convex lens . we mean that the object is at a distance equal to the focal length f of the lens . figure shows an object ab placed at the focus f of a convex lens . a parallel ray of light ad passes through the focus f after refraction and goes along the path dx . another ray ac passing through the centre c of the lens goes straight in the direction cy . the two refracted rays dx and cy are parallel to one another . these parallel rays will intersect or meet at a far off distance to form an image at infinity . and since the image is formed at infinity . it is not possible to show it in our diagram . it
for example . in figure a . the current in a face of the circular wire is flowing in the clockwise direction . so this face of current carrying circular wire will behave as a south magnetic pole or s pole . on the other hand . in figure b the current in the face of the circular wire is flowing in the anticlockwise direction . so this face of current carrying circular wire will behave as a north magnetic pole or n pole .
petroleum petroleum is a dark coloured . viscous . and foul smelling crude oil see figure . the name petroleum means rock oil petra rock oleum oil . it is called petroleum because it is found under the crust of earth trapped in rocks . the crude oil petroleum is a complex mixture of several solid . liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons mixed with water . salt and earth particles . it also contains small amounts of other carbon
passage of light through a rectangular slab let a ray of light rp travelling through air be incident on the upper surface of a transparent rectangular slab figure . a . this ray gets refracted at the upper surface and moves along pq within the slab . when it reaches the lower surface . it gets refracted again as it re enters air . figure . b shows the cross section of the slab and the path of the ray . p . fig . . 
ordinary white light is a superposition of waves of wavelengths extending throughout the visible spectrum . the speed of light in vacuum is same for all wavelengths . but the speed in a material substance is different for different wavelengths . as a result different colours are deviated by different angles when they pass through a prism . this is called dispersion of light . hence . the splitting of white light into its constituent seven colours is called dispersion of light fig . .
the human eye human eye is the most delicate and complicated natural optical instrument . it enables as to see the beautiful nature and the natural phenomena . it is a spherical ball of diameter about . cm . its essential parts are described below 
a solar cell cannot be used when there is no sunlight .
uses of convex lenses i convex lenses are used in spectacles to correct the defect of vision called hypermetropia or long sightedness . ii convex lens is used for making a simple camera . iii convex lens is used as a magnifying glass or magnifying lens by palmists . watchmakers . etc . . iv convex lenses are used in making microscopes . telescopes and slide projectors or film projectors . we will now solve some problems based on the formation of images by a convex lens .
in si . power is measured in dioptre d .
 seeing is one of the most common things we do . when light from an object enters our eyes . we see the object . this light can be that emitted by the object . as in the case of an electric bulb or a red hot iron nail . it can also be the light bouncing off an object like a book . an object that emits light is a source of light . during the day . the sun acts as a natural source of light . candles . oil lamps and electric bulbs are sources of light made by us .
m bf fig . image formation by a convex mirror . a 
hydro energy is easily storable . conventional renewable energy . it is also solar energy in another form . solar energy is incident on the water in the oceans which evaporates and forms clouds . these clouds take water in the form of small droplets to distant places due to air currents . this converts the solar energy into the potential energy of the water droplets . during rainfall this potential energy of water droplets is converted into kinetic energy and the
 . magnetic field lines the concept of magnetic field lines was put forward by michael faraday in order to explain the interaction between the poles separated by some distance . the magnetic force is action at a distance force . which can be best understood by the lines of forces or field lines . according to faraday . a magnet modifies the space around itself in such a manner that if any other magnetic substance moves into this space it experiences a force . this is termed as the magnetic force . the region itself is termed as the magnetic field of the magnet . a magnetic field around a magnet can be visualised by drawing magnetic field lines around the magnet . a magnetic field line is a path straight or curved . the tangent to which at any point gives the direction the magnetic field at that point .
left to right . since the incident light always goes from left to right . all the distances measured from the pole p of mirror to the right side will be considered positive because they will be in the same direction as the incident light . on the other hand . all the distances measured from pole p of mirror to the left side will be negative because they are measured against the direction of incident light .
common measuring instruments the electric current in a circuit is measured by an instrument called the ammeter . and the potential difference between two points in it is measured by a voltmeter . you might have seen these meters in voltage stabilizers . in these meters . a needle moving over a graduated scale gives the value of the measured quantity . each meter has two terminals . the terminal marked is connected by a wire to the higher potential side of a circuit . while the terminal marked is connected to the lower potential side .
the exact speed of light in vacuum is . x m s and that in air is . x m s . we can see that the speed of light in air is almost the same as that in vacuum . so for the purpose of determining refractive index we can also treat air as if it were vacuum . so . the refractive index of a medium or substance with respect to air is also considered to be its absolute refractive index . thus . airnglass can also be written as nglass . the absolute refractive index of a medium or substance is just called its refractive index .
conventional sources of energy may not last long . thus new non conventional sources of energy have to be tapped .
heat produced across it is . directly proportional to the square of current through the conductor i . e . . hoc . . . . . directly proportional to the resistance of the conductor i . e . . hor . directly proportional to the time for which the current is passed i . e . . hot . . . . combining the above three equations . we have h l rt . . . . or h i rt . . . . where j is called joule s mechanical equivalent of heat and has a value of j . j cal l . the above equation is called joule s law of heating .
 . ocean thermal energy a very large area of sea is called an ocean . the water at the surface of an ocean gets heated by the heat of the sun and attains a higher temperature than the colder water at deeper levels in the ocean . so . there is always a temperature difference between the water at the surface of ocean and at deeper levels . the energy available due to the difference in the temperature of water at the surface of the ocean and at deeper levels is called ocean thermal energy ote . the ocean thermal energy can be converted into a usable form of energy like electricity . this can be done as follows 
 a and a wirings different appliances have different resistances . and they draw different amounts of current when the same voltage is applied across them . a w heater has a resistance of about . whereas a w bulb has a resistance of about . from ohm s law . when v is applied across each of them . the currents drawn by them are v a i heater bulb v . a . to carry larger currents . we need thicker wires and better quality materials in electrical fittings such as switches and sockets . two types of electrical fittings are usually available in the market one meant for a maximum current of a and the other for a maximum current of a . separate wires are drawn for a and a fittings . which are usually fixed on separate boards . the wires leading up to a fittings are thicker than those leading up to a fittings . appliances that draw heavy currents are connected to the a boards and the others . to the a boards .
potential of second point . v v work done . w from relation . work done charge moved potential difference i . e . . w q v v putting values . we get w x x work done j
 . effect of area of cross section of the conductor it has been found by experiments that the resistance of a conductor is inversely proportional to its area of cross section . that is . resistance . roc where a is area of cross section of conductor 
solar panels are used in satellites and space probes . high cost of the solar cells has limited its use for domestic purposes .
more and more dead vegetation and sediments collected on top of them . the half rotted trees were crushed and flattened . they formed coal . oil formed during the same period . oil formed under the seas . tiny plants . animals and bacteria sank to the bottom of the sea when they died . mixing with the sand and silt on the seabed . their bodies did not rot away completely . but were crushed by the weight of sediments falling on top of them . their remains became a mixture of carbon compounds petroleum or crude oil .
the position of image formed in a plane mirror the image formed in a plane mirror is at the same distance behind the mirror as the object is in front of the mirror see figure . in other words . the image and object are at equal
 i first law of reflection the angle of incidence i is equal to the angle of reflection r . ii second law of reflection the incident ray . the reflected ray and the normal at the point of incidence all lie in the same plane .
this is how a metal sphere can be positively charged without touching . using the process of electrostatic induction .
difference in levels of water in the reservoir and the sea is used to make water fall on turbines . surface followers are devices that move up and down with the waves . and this motion is converted to rotary motion . used for turning the shaft of a generator .
a solar cooker cannot be used on rainy or foggy days and during the night .
some of the phenomena of light can be explained only if light is considered to be made up of waves whereas others can be explained only if light is thought to be made up of particles . for example . the phenomena of diffraction bending of light around the corners of tiny objects . interference and polarization of light can only be explained if light is considered to be of wave nature . the particle theory of light cannot explain these phenomena . on the other hand . the phenomena of reflection and refraction of light . and casting of shadows of objects by light . can be explained only if light is thought to be made of particles . wave theory of light cannot explain these phenomena . thus . there is evidence for the wave nature of light as well as for particle nature of light .
distinction between a plane glass sheet . a convex lens and a concave lens without touching surface the glass sheet is placed over a printed page and the virtual image of the print is seen . the magnification of the image is observed . then make an idea of the magnification . if magnification is one . glass sheet is plane . if magnification is more than one . its a convex lens . if magnification is less than one . its a concave lens .
relation of power with focal length a lens of less focal length focuses a parallel beam of light at near point . it produces more convergence or more divergence . it is said to have more power . therefore power of a lens is reciprocal of its focal length . we have . p units of power is dioptre d . one dioptre is the power of a lens of focal length m . in general . p dioptre f metre f cm 
again . this action is repeated as long as the current is passed in wire ab . it should be noted that the current carrying wire is kicked forward because a force is exerted on it by the magnetic field of the u shaped magnet . from this experiment we conclude that when a current carrying conductor is placed in a magnetic field . a mechanical force is exerted on the conductor which makes it move .
 the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum to the speed of light in a medium is called the refractive index n of the medium . n c v . where c and v are the speeds of light in vacuum and the medium respectively .
we will consider all these six positions one by one .
nuclear fusion is the fusing of two or more lighter nuclei into a heavier nucleus with release of energy
energy sources which cannot be replaced quickly are called non renewable energy sources . coal . natural gas and petroleum are examples of non renewable sources of energy .
circuit diagrams electrical circuits are represented by drawing circuit diagrams . a diagram which indicates how different components in a circuit have been connected by using the electrical symbols for the components . is called a circuit diagram . an electric circuit consisting of a cell . a bulb and a closed switch which was drawn in figure a can be represented by drawing a circuit diagram shown in figure a . in the circuit diagram shown in figure a . a bulb has been connected to the two terminals of a cell by copper wires through a closed switch .
plants and factories can be controlled by washing down the smoke and acidic gases by water in a scrubber . scrubbers are tanks where the smoke and waste gases produced by thermal power plants and factories . etc . . are sprayed by jets of water before they reach the chimney . water washes away soot carbon present in smoke and dissolves most of the harmful acidic gases like sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides .
clock face rule a current carrying circular wire or loop behaves like a thin disc magnet whose one face is a north pole and the other face is a south pole . the polarity north or south of the two faces of a current carrying circular coil or loop can be determined by using the clock face rule given below .
real and apparent depth when an object kept in one medium at some depth real depth is observed from other medium . it appears to be at different position apparent depth . this happens due to refraction at plane surfaces . real depth apparent depth refractive index u 
figure . search lights to produce a strong beam of light which travels a considerable distance in the darkness of night .
 the binding energy nucleon of deuteron h and the helium atom zhe are . mev and mev respectively . if the two deuteron atoms fuse to form a single helium atom . then . how much energy is released ans . binding energy of deuteron zh x . mev . mev binding energy of helium atom he x mev mev h² h² he energy released energy released be of helium xbe of deuteron mev x . mev . mev
accommodation is a process by which the eye changes the focal length of the eye lens so as to always obtain the image at the retina .
generating electricity from geothermal energy at places where dry steam comes out of the surface of the earth . it can be used directly to turn turbines connected to generators . the world s largest geothermal electric power plant . at geysers steam field . california . uses this method to generate electricity . at places where steam does not come out on its own . arrangements are made to convert the hot underground water into steam . the steam is then used to turn turbines .
solar panel although a solar cell provides very little power . a large number of connected solar cells . spread over a large area . can provide sufficient power for many applications . such an arrangement of
you may question . then why planets do not twinkle the reason is simple . the stars . although very large as compared to the planets . appear as tiny specks in the sky due to their immense distance from the earth as compared to the huge size of the planets . thus . the stars appear as point sources of light and the planets appear as a large combination of such sources . thus . the change in the path of light coming from the planets is negligible as compared to that coming from the stars . therefore . the planets do not seem to twinkle like star .
this defect arises due to the weakening of the ciliary muscles and the decreasing flexibility of the eye lens . sometimes an old person may suffer from both myopia and hypermetropia . in such situations he requires bi focal lenses two spectacles in one frame . in which the upper half is a concave lens used to correct myopia and the lower half is a convex lens used to correct hypermetropia .
 when light travelling in one medium falls at an angle on another medium . it bends . this phenomenon of bending of light at the surface separating two media is commonly known as refraction of light .
the case of light falling normally or perpendicularly on a glass slab in all our discussions so far we have assumed that the incident ray of light falls obliquely to the surface of glass slab and bending of ray of light takes place . if the incident ray falls normally or perpendicularly to the surface of a glass slab . then there is no bending of the ray of light . and it goes straight . for example . in figure . a ray of light ao travelling in air falls on a glass slab normally or perpendicularly at
magnetic field and magnetic field lines the space around a magnet in which the force of attraction and repulsion due to the magnet can be detected is called the magnetic field .
disadvantages of hydroelectric power a hydroelectric power is generated only near the rivers having water throughout the year . this electric power has to be carried to the sub stations for distribution to the houses and factories situated far off from the sites of hydroelectric power stations . this is done through the transmission wires . so lot of money is to be spent on this process . b a large area of fertile land is submerged at the site of the dam constructed for tapping energy from the flowing water . c a large number of people residing near the site of a dam are dislocated . so . a lot of problems are to be faced in rehabilitating this population . that is why . there is a lot of opposition by the people around the site of dam for the construction of dam . d a large number of plants and wild life in the area of the dam is submerged in water . so . a large variety of flora plants and fauna animals is destroyed . e hydroelectric dams cannot be constructed everywhere . they are constructed mostly in hilly areas .
the old colour convention is red . called live wire . black . called neutral wire and green . called earth wire . the new colour convention is brown . called live wire . light blue . called neutral wire and green or yellow . called earth wire . the power is supplied through a cable consisting of three wires i live or phase wire . ii neutral wire and iii the earth wire .
 x reflection at curved surface convex and concave mirrors . u and v graph if u . v are the object and image distance and f is the focal length . then the mirror formula is . y t . c and it resembles y x c u v c . u c is a straight line u . v graph . the u v graph will be a hyperbola as of iu v f the straight line will cut the hyperbola f . . v u t i f 
 . resultant resistance of three resistances connected in series
electric potential when a small positive test charge is placed in the electric field due to another charge . it experiences a force . so . work has to be done on the positive test charge to move it against this force of repulsion . the electric potential or potential at a point in an electric field is defined as the work done in moving a unit positive charge from infinity to that point . potential is denoted by the symbol v and its unit is volt . a potential of volt at a point means that joule of work is done in moving unit positive charge from infinity to that point . since the unit of charge is coulomb . so we can also say that a potential of volt at a point means that joule of work is done in moving coulomb of positive charge from infinity to that point . a more common term used in electricity is . however . potential difference which we will discuss now .
electric current when two charged bodies at different electric potentials are connected by a metal wire . then electric charges will flow from the body at higher potential to the one at lower potential till they both acquire the same potential . this flow of charges in the metal wire constitutes an electric current . it is the potential difference between the ends of the wire which makes the electric charges or current to flow in the wire . we now know that the electric charges whose flow in a metal wire constitutes electric current are the negative charges called electrons . keeping this in mind . we can now define electric current as follows .
substituting for i . in i . we have r₂ or i . . r₂ r₂ similarly . . . . . r . r thus . r . i r . the current through each branch in a parallel combination of resistors is inversely proportional to its resistance .
advantages of natural gas . natural gas being a complete fuel in itself can be used directly for heating purposes in homes and industries . there is no need to add anything else to it . . natural gas is a good fuel because it has a high calorific value of up to kj g . moreover . natural gas burns with a smokeless flame and causes no air pollution . it also does not produce any poisonous gases on burning .
ans . disadvantages of tidal energy i the range of rise and fall of water during tides is enough to produce electricity on a small scale only . ii tidal dams cannot be built anywhere on sea shore . ii the actua iii the actual generation of electricity is for a short period of time . the tides only happen twice a day so electricity can be produced for only that period .
the term fossil means the remains of prehistoric plants and animals buried under the earth millions of years ago may be due to some natural calamity . fossil fuels are formed from dead plants and animals which got buried deep in the earth and got covered with sediments like mud and sand in the absence of oxygen . chemical reactions . high pressure . heat and the action of anaerobic bacteria converted these fossils into fossil fuels like coal . petroleum and natural gas .
axis is x y . now . a ray of light ad coming from an object is parallel to the principal axis of the convex lens . it enters the convex lens and gets refracted or bends at point d inside it . after refraction its path changes . it passes through focus f and goes in the direction dx see figure .
competition window electric field electric field may be defined as the space surrounding a charge or a system of charges within which the influence of these charge can be felt . the force per unit charge experienced by a very small test charge at a point in an electric field is called the intensity of the electric field at that point .
the bouncing back of light when it strikes a smooth or polished surface is called reflection of light . reflection is of two types . specular or regular and . diffuse or irregular .
direct current dc generator the principle . construction and working of a dc generator is the same as that of an ac generator except that in place of slip rings as sliding contacts . we have a split ring or a commutator . in a split ring . r and r are the two halves of the same ring . the ends of the armature coil are connected to these rings and these rings rotate with the armature .
solar cells provide clean . cheap and noiseless energy
we know that the front side of a shining steel spoon is a kind of concave mirror . so . if we keep our face at a fairly good distance from the front side of a shining steel spoon so that it is beyond its centre of curvature . we will see a real . inverted and smaller image diminished image of our face in the spoon as shown in figure
observe the direction of deflection of the north pole of the needle . if the current flows from north to south . as shown in fig . a . the north pole of the compass needle would move towards the east .
figure . a . shows several rays of a beam of light incident on a rough surface . the surface will reflect the rays in various directions . reflection from any rough surface is known as diffuse reflection . figure . . shows several rays of a beam of light incident on a smooth . mirror like . reflecting surface . the reflected rays are parallel to each other . as indicated in the figure . reflection of light from such a smooth surface is called specular reflection .
advantages of wind energy a the source of energy wind is free . b harnessing wind energy is a pollution free process . with no smoke . chemicals . etc . . being produced . c a small wind electric plant can be set up near a factory to provide pollution free power for its use .
ciliary muscles ciliary muscles controls the focal length of the eye lens . when these muscles contracts . the focal length of the lens decreases . on the other hand . when they expand . they exert inward pressure on the eye lens and increases the focal length of the lens .
slip rings r . and r . are two hollow metal rings held at different heights . the end d of the armature coil is connected to ring r . the end c of the coil is passed through ry without touching it and is connected to r . these rings rotate with the rotation of the armature .
magnetic field lines do not cross each other . crowding of magnetic field lines means a strong magnetic field .
the two reflected rays dx and ea are diverging rays but they appear to intersect at point a when produced backwards . thus a is the virtual image of point a of the object . to get the full image of the object . we draw the perpendicular a b to the axis from point a . thus a b is the virtual image of the object ab . it is clear from figure that the image is formed behind the convex mirror between the pole and the focus . it is virtual . erect and smaller than the object or diminished . from the above discussion we conclude that when an object is placed anywhere between pole p and infinity in front of a convex mirror . the image formed is i behind the mirror between pole p and focus f . ii virtual and erect . and iii diminished smaller than the object .
illustrations how much work is done in moving a charge of c from a point at v to a point at v . ans . here . charge moved . q c potential of first point . v . v
 ii maxwell s cork screw rule or right hand screw rule imagine a right handed screw to be rotated in the direction of current and . then the direction of rotation gives the direction of magnetic field lines . screws are of two types . right handed and left handed . a right handed screw is one which when rotated towards the right hand will close . whereas a left hand screw is one which when rotated towards the left will close . in figure . b . if we rotate a right handed screw in the direction of current downwards . then the screw will rotate in the clockwise direction . thus . the direction of the magnetic field will be clockwise .
working the operation of a motor can be understood by considering figure . . in fig . a . the current from the battery enters the coil through the left brush b . and half ring r . goes around the coil . and then leaves through the right half ring r and brush b . according to fleming s left hand rule . the directions of the forces on the two sides ab and cd of the coil are as shown in the figure . the force on ab acts
magnetic field is inclined at an angle of about with the geographical axis . due to this a freely suspended magnet or magnetic needle makes an angle of about with the geographical axis and points only approximately in the north south directions at a place . in other words . a freely suspended magnet does not show exact geographical north and south because the magnetic axis and geographical axis of the earth do not coincide . it is now believed that the earth s magnetism is due to the magnetic effect of current which is flowing in the liquid core at the centre of the earth . thus . earth is a huge electromagnet . before we go further and discuss the magnetic effect of current in detail . please answer the following questions 
several miles beneath the earth s surface is hot . dry rock being heated by the molten magma directly below it . technology is being developed to drill into this rock . inject cold water down one well . circulate it through the hot . fractured rock . and draw off the heated water from another well . one day . we might also be able to recover heat directly from the magma . although geothermal power plants have an average availability of over . we will run our power plants at efficiency .
since concave mirror can produce both real and virtual images . therefore . magnification of a concave mirror can be positive or negative . on the other hand a convex mirror always forms a virtual image therefore . magnification for a convex mirror is always positive .
fig . a windmill . windmills are now used in wind energy farms to drive electric generators .
conventional sources of energy the traditional sources of energy which are familiar to most people are called conventional sources of energy . the main conventional sources of energy are wood and fossil fuels like coal . petroleum and natural gas . the fuels derived from wood . coal and petroleum such as charcoal . coke . coal gas . petrol . diesel . kerosene . fuel oil and liquefied petroleum gas lpg are also known as conventional sources of energy or conventional fuels . even dung cakes uple is a conventional source of energy in our country .
the two half rings r . and r . rotate with the coil and touch the two carbon brushes b . and b . one by one . as a result . each carbon brush continues to have the same polarity or . brush b . always remains positive and brush b remains negative . since the current remains in the same direction . therefore . the current so produced is called direct current de .
cause of refraction light rays get deviated from their original path . while entering from one transparent medium to another medium of different density . this deviation change in direction in the path of light is due to the change in velocity of light in the different medium . the velocity of light depends on the nature of the medium in which it travels . velocity of light in a rarer medium low optical density is more than in a denser medium high optical density .
uses telescopes . camera lens . burning glass in a camera . in eye while reading photocopier projector . microscope objective spotlights magnifying glass . eye lenses spectacles for long sightedness .
therefore . glass is optically denser than water . and more bending of light rays takes place in glass than in water . from this we conclude that higher the refractive index of a substance . more it will change the direction of a beam of light passing through it .
the mirror formula .
natural gas natural gas is another source of heat energy . it is a fossil fuel . composition it mainly consists of methane about and small quantities of ethane and propane . compressed natural gas cng when natural gas in liquid form is subjected to high pressure . we get compressed natural gas cng . use of natural gas and cng i natural gas and compressed natural gas are used as fuel for scooters . buses and trucks .
hydro power or hydroelectric power plant
 ii iris and pupil between the cornea and the lens . we have a muscular coloured diaphragm called iris . which has a small hole in it . called the pupil . iris is the coloured part that we see in the eye . it is green in some cases . black or brown in others . the pupil appears black because any light falling on it goes into the eye and there is almost no chance of the light coming back .
 i all distances . object distance u . image distance v and focal length f are measured from the optical centre of a lens . ii the distances measured in the direction of incident ray are taken as positive and distances measured against the direction of incident ray are taken as negative . iii all distances heights of objects and images above principal axis are taken as positive and those below the principal axis are taken as negative .
face rule is also used in determining the polarities of the two faces or two ends of a current carrying solenoid as well as an electromagnet .
plane of incidence the plane in which the normal and the incident ray lie . is called the plane of incidence . the plane of the book page . is the plane of incidence . plane of reflection the plane in which the normal and the reflected ray lie . is called the plane of reflection . the plane of the book page . is the plane of reflection .
it should also be noted that the whole purpose of using a convex lens here is to increase the converging power of the eye lens . the convex lens used in spectacles increases the converging power of eye lens and helps in forming the image of a nearby object on the retina of the eye .
for a concave mirror . an object situated beyond the focus . the image is always real and inverted whereas for an object situated between the pole and the focus . the image is virtual and erect .
f cm sign convention step . using . . we get u v f or v cm . thus . image is formed at a distance of cm behind the concave mirror as v is positive . therefore . image is virtual in nature . i h v step . using we get h pxh cm x cm cm u cm so . image is cm tall . since his positive . so image is erect .
resistivity when i a then p r resistivity of a material is the resistance of a wire made of that material of unit length and unit area of cross section . a r p
 . . . floating gas holder type biogas plant this type of biogas plant consists of a well shaped underground tank called digester tank . the sides of digester tank are made of bricks and base is made of concrete . a drum shaped gas holder made of steel floats in the inverted position over the dung slurry in the digester tank see fig . . the gas collects in the floating gas holder . the gas holder can move up or down and its movement is controlled by control pipe . the biogas comes out from the outlet at the top of the gas holder tank . the digester tank has a partition wall . which divides it into two chambers and also helps in increasing gas pressure . on the left side of the digester tank is an inlet pipe made of cement which is connected to a mixing tank . this inlet pipe brings the fresh dung slurry into the digester tank . on the right side of the digester tank is an outlet pipe made of cement which is connected to an overflow tank . this outlet pipe is for removing the spent dung slurry after the extraction of biogas . working cattle dung and water are mixed in equal proportions in the mixing tank to prepare the slurry which is fed to digester tank through an inlet
myopia short sightedness or near sightedness is corrected by using spectacles containing concave lenses . when a concave lens diverging lens l of suitable power is placed in front of the myopic eye as shown in figure c . then the parallel rays of light coming from the distant object at infinity are first diverged by the concave lens . due to this the concave lens forms a virtual image of the distant object at the far point f of this myopic eye see figure c . since the rays of light now appear to be coming from the eye s far point f . they can be easily focused by the eye lens to form an image on the retina see figure c . please note that the concave lens used for correcting myopia should be of such a focal length or power that it produces a virtual image of the distant object lying at infinity at the far point of the myopic eye .
the two wires coming out of the meter are connected to a main switch s . this main switch is to switch off the electricity supply when required so as to repair any faults in the internal wiring . after the main switch . there is another fuse f in the live wire . this is called consumer s fuse . it is very important to note here that usually there are two separate circuits in a house . the lighting circuit with a a fuse and the power circuit with a a fuse . the lighting circuit is for running low power rating devices such as electric bulbs . tube lights . fans . radio . and tv . etc . . which draw small current . on the other hand . power circuit is for running high power rating devices such as electric iron . room heater . geyser . electric stove . refrigerator . etc . . which draw heavy current . but to make things simple . we will describe only a lighting circuit with a ampere fuse . each distribution circuit is provided with a separate fuse so that if a fault like short circuiting occurs in one circuit . its corresponding fuse blows off but the other circuit remains unaffected . another
 . advance sunrise and delayed sunset sometimes the refraction or bending of the light rays tend to bring
 b electric bulb glows when electric current flows through the filament of the bulb . filament of an electric bulb is made of a thin wire of tungsten . the melting point of filament is high i . e . . about c . the filament of the bulb is enclosed in a glass envelope fixed over an insulated support . the glass envelope of electric bulb is filled with inactive gases like nitrogen and argon . since resistance of thin filament is very high . so a large heat is produced as the electric current flows through the filament . due to this large amount of heat produced . filament of the bulb becomes white hot . hence . the filament of the bulb emits light and heat .
 . when the object lies between f and f consider two rays one moving parallel to the principal axis and the other passing through the optical centre . after refraction the two rays meet beyond f on the other side of the lens . thus . the image lies beyond f fig . . when the object lies between f and f . then . the image is formed beyond f . . the image is real . inverted and bigger than object . . it is used in . microscope objective .
far point and near point although the power of accommodation of the eye is amazing . it has certain limitations . the focal length of the eye cannot adjust enough to form sharp images of objects kept beyond a certain point and closer than a certain point . the farthest point up to which the eye can see properly is called the far point of the eye . for the normal eye . the far point is at infinity . when viewing an object at the far point . the ciliary muscles are in their most relaxed state . and the crystalline lens is at its thinnest figure . a . thus . the eye lens is at its maximum focal length when looking at an object at the far point .
dispersion and scattering of light dj you know that when a ray of light passes through a transparent rectangular slab with parallel faces . the emergent ray gets displaced parallel to itself . but a prism causes a net deviation change in direction in the path of a ray of light . in figure . . if the prism were not present . the ray of light would have travelled along a straight line . i . e . . along pt . because of the refractions at the two surfaces of the prism . the ray bends and travels along rs after emerging from the prism . the total angle through which the ray deviates is ztds . this angle is called fig . . cross section of a prism showing passage of a ray the angle of deviation . for a given angle of incidence i . the deviation produced by a prism depends on the refractive index of the prism material . the higher the refractive index . the greater is the deviation .
 ii big convex mirrors are used as shop security mirrors see figure . by installing a big convex mirror at a strategic point in the shop . the shop owner can keep an eye on the customers to look for thieves and shoplifters among them .
 i when the metal wire has not been connected to a source of electricity like a cell or a battery . then the electrons present in it move at random in all the directions between the atoms of the metal wire as shown in figure .
why the sky is blue the scattering of blue component of the white sunlight by air molecules present in the atmosphere causes the blue colour of the sky . this can be explained as follows .
point of incidence the point on the reflecting surface at which a ray of light strikes . is called the point of incidence as well as point of reflection also .
working when the key is not plugged . no current flows through the circuit and the lamp does not glow . when the key is plugged . the circuit is completed and a current begins to flow through the various components of the circuit . as a result the lamp glows . when the resistance of the circuit is varied with the help of the rheostat . the brightness of the lamp changes . on increasing the resistance one finds that the deflection of the ammeter decreases . this shows a decrease in current and hence a decrease in the intensity of the lamp . when the resistance is decreased the reverse occurs . the change in current due to the variation of resistance can be noted from the ammeter and the potential difference across the bulb can be noted from the voltmeter .
direction of incident rays direction of incident rays negative positive negative positive positive negative positive negative fig . . 
sometimes . due to genetic disorder . a person may not possess some type of cone cells . such a person is unable to distinguish between the different colours and is said to be suffering from colour blindness . colour blindness is the lack of ability of the eye to distinguish between different colours . a person who is totally colour blind sees the world only in shades of grey . white . and
resistances or resistors in parallel the combined resistance or resultant resistance of a number of resistances or resistors connected in parallel can be calculated by using the law of combination of resistances in parallel . according to the law of combination of resistances in parallel the reciprocal of the combined resistance of a number of resistances connected in parallel is equal to the sum of the reciprocals of all the individual resistances . for example . if a number of resistances . r . r . r . . . . . . etc . . are connected in parallel . then their combined resistance r is given by the formula . . . r r r r suppose that a resistance r of ohms and another resistance r of ohms are connected in parallel and we want to find out their combined resistance r . we know that r rr t . . . . . . . now . r so . combined resistance . r ohms
if there were more than three resistors . then the above expression will take the form rg r r r r . . . . . . . for example . if we connect three resistors of resistances . and ohm in series . the equivalent resistance of the combination is r ohm ohm if there are n resistors each having a resistance r . then the series combination of these resistors gives an equivalent resistance of r r r r r . . . n times nr
in figure . the object ab has been placed between the focus f and centre of curvature c of a concave mirror . now . a ray of light ad parallel to the principal axis gets reflected at point d and then passes through the focus f . a second ray of light ae passing through the centre of curvature c falls normally on the mirror surface at e and returns along the same path . thus . we have two reflected rays df and ec which are converging in the downward direction . if we extend these rays further in the downward direction . they actually intersect at point a . thus a is the real image of point a of the object . to get the complete image we draw a b perpendicular to the axis from point a . thus . a b is the real image of the object ab and it can be received on a screen . for example . if we take a lighted
an oscillating water column plant uses the incoming and outgoing air to run turbines .
atmospheric refraction we know that when light goes from one medium to another medium having different optical densities . then refraction of light rays or bending of light rays takes place . now . in the atmosphere . we have air everywhere . but all the air in the atmosphere is not at the same temperature . some of the air layers of the atmosphere are cold whereas other air layers of the atmosphere are comparatively warm or hotter . now . the cooler air layers of the atmosphere behave as optically denser medium for light rays whereas the warmer air layers or hotter air layers of the atmosphere behave as optically rarer medium for the light rays . so . in the same atmosphere we have air layers having different optical densities . and when light rays pass through the atmosphere having air layers of different optical densities . then refraction of light takes place . the refraction of light caused by the earth s atmosphere having air layers of varying optical densities is called atmospheric refraction .
observe the change in the direction of deflection of the needle . you will see that now the needle moves in opposite direction . that is . towards the west as shown in fig . b . it means that the direction of magnetic field produces by the electric current is also reversed .
battery re eugh h a b fig . . a current carrying wire produces a magnetic field that deflects the needle of the compass .
 . a ray of light incident on the pole of the mirror gets reflected in accordance with the laws of reflection . fig . . a and b 
crafernding fig . . d nothing is too wonderful to be true if it be consistent with the laws of nature and in such things as these . experiment is the best test of such consistency .
thus . a metal is a collection of positive ions fixed at their position and a large number of free electrons moving freely in the metal . because there are a very large number of atoms per unit volume in a metal and hence a very large number of free electrons per unit volume are present . these electrons collide with each other and with other ions and change their speed and direction continuously . the electrons follow a zigzag path inside a metal conductor when it is not connected to a battery figure . . note that these free electrons cannot come out of the metal but are free to move anywhere in the metal .
it is real . inverted and much smaller than the object or highly diminished . from the above discussion we conclude that when an object is at infinity from a concave mirror . the image formed is i at the focus f . m studygear ii real and inverted . and iii much smaller than the object or highly diminished . dvd
when a ray of light passes through a glass slab it is displaced laterally . this displacement is called lateral displacement . the extent of the lateral displacement is i directly proportional to the thickness of glass slab . ii directly proportional to the angle of incidence . iii directly proportional to the refractive index of glass slab . iv inversely proportional to the wavelength of incident light .
 . principal axis since the lens contains two spherical surfaces . therefore . it has two centres of curvature . the line joining these centres and passing through the optical centre is called principal axis . in figure . a and . b . the line joining cị and c is called the principal axis .
construction an ac generator consists of the following components as shown in figure . . i armature coil it consists of a large number of turns of a rectangular coil abcd made of copper wire wound over a soft iron laminated core .
characteristics of light the speed of light in vacuum or free space is x m s . marginally less in air equals to x m s . in water it is . m s and in glass it is m s . the speed of light changes when it travels from one medium to another . light travels from one point to another in a straight line which is known as rectilinear propagation of light . the light gets reflected when it falls on polished surfaces like mirror . the frequency of light remains same in all mediums . the light undergoes refraction when it travels from one transparent medium to another .
please note that under normal circumstances . the air in the upper atmosphere is optically rarer and as we come down . the air in the lower atmosphere is optically denser . this arrangement of optical densities of air in the atmosphere can . however . change according to the local conditions such as temperature . etc . . at
isobars isobars are the atoms of different elements which have the same mass number but different atomic numbers . e . g . na and ne
the fuse rating is the maximum safe current permitted to flow in a fuse before it breaks .
values of refractive indices of some transparent media refractive index . name of substance air hydrogen carbon dioxide refractive index . . . . . ice . . name of substance glycerine benzene crown glass rock salt carbon disulphide flint glass ruby diamond silicon water . . alcohol . . . . kerosene carbon tetrachloride turpentine oil . . . . 
 . atmospheric refraction we live at the bottom of an ocean of air called atmosphere . light that reaches us . travels through this atmosphere air and is modified by it . the earth s atmosphere is not uniform . under most conditions the density of the atmosphere decreases with increasing height from the surface . the refractive index depends on the density of a gas because the less dense the gas . the more like a vacuum it becomes . refraction occurs whenever there is any change in the refractive index . when there is an abrupt change as at the surface of glass . the change in the direction of the light is abrupt . but when the change is gradual . the path of a light ray is a gentle curve . the gradual increase in the refractive index as light travels into the lower atmosphere means that light from celestial objects such as the sun . moon . and stars bend towards the normal as it travels from an optically rarer into an optically denser medium . this difference of refractive index amongst the various layers of the atmosphere gives rise to some spectacular phenomenon . some of these phenomena are illustrated below .
a lodestone occurs in all types of shapes and has a small magnetic field . to produce a large magnetic field . a large lodestone would be required . this would be very cumbersome . thus . the need arose for small powerful magnets i . e . the artificial magnets . artificial magnets come in different shapes and sizes according to the requirement . the artificial magnets are usually made of an alloy called
conductors and insulators materials that conduct electricity easily are called good conductors or simply . conductors . and . materials that do not conduct electricity easily are called insulators . all metals conduct electricity because they have some loosely bound free electrons . which flow when a potential difference is applied . however . some metals conduct electricity better than others . silver is the best conductor . but because of the high cost of silver . electric wires are made of copper . or in some cases aluminium . most nonmetallic solids do not conduct electricity . although diamond and graphite are both forms of carbon a nonmetal . graphite is a conductor while diamond is an insulator . insulators do not conduct electricity because their electrons are tightly bound to the atoms . rubber . plastics . wood . glass and porcelain are some examples of insulators . insulators have many uses . for example . they are used as protective covers on electric wires and electrician s tools . certain liquids also conduct electricity . while distilled water is an insulator . addition of certain salts . acids or bases allows it to conduct electricity . under normal circumstances . gases do not conduct electricity .
radius of curvature of a mirror is represented by the letter r .
slit red dispersing prism green violet grace sessere reces green one wavelength see csszero cccsere white light made to pass through a slit fig . newton s prism experiment .
material . the unit of resistivity is ohm metre . the resistivity of a material depends on its temperature . for metals and alloys of metals . the resistivity increases with rise in temperature . the resistivities of some materials are given in table . . note that the values of resistivity of metals are very small of the order of m . this makes them good conductors . metals such as copper are therefore used for making electric wires . the filament of an electric bulb incandescent lamp is usually made of tungsten . as the melting point of tungsten is very high . the values of resistivity of insulators such as glass and fused quartz are very high of the order of m . alloys like nichrome have times larger values of resistivity than those of metals . this makes them suitable for use in the heating elements of electric irons . toasters . etc . these alloys also have an advantage their resistance varies very little with temperature . and these do not oxidize readily .
it is also due to the refraction of light that a thick glass slab appears to be less thick when seen from above . than it actually is . similarly . an ink mark or the writing on a piece of paper appears to be raised and much nearer than it actually is . when viewed by keeping a glass slab over it see figure
when the point object is on the principal axis let us consider a point object o placed on the principal axis of a spherical mirror figure . shows this for both types of spherical mirrors . a ray op along the principal axis falls normally on the mirror and . therefore . retraces its path . take any other ray oa . incident on the mirror at a . let the reflected ray or its projection backwards cut the principal axis at i . as i is the point of intersection of the reflected rays . it is the image of o . all reflected rays will pass through or seem to pass through it . thus . the image of a point on the principal axis is formed on the principal axis itself .
reflecting surface the surface from which the light is reflected . is called the reflecting surface . mm is the reflecting surface .
accommodation a normal eye can see the distant objects as well as the nearby objects clearly . we will now discuss how the eye is able to focus the objects lying at various distances . an eye can focus the images of the distant objects as well as the nearby objects on its retina by changing the focal length or converging power of its lens . the focal length of the eye lens is changed by the action of ciliary muscles . the ciliary muscles can change the thickness of the soft and flexible eye lens and hence its focal length which . in turn . changes the converging power of the eye lens . let us see how it happens .
all the distribution circuits are connected in parallel so that if there is a short circuit in one distribution circuit . its fuse melts nowadays we use mcb miniature circuit breaker in place of fuse wires leaving the other circuits in operation . figure . shows the distribution of electricity to different rooms .
a fuse is inserted with each gadget which needs protection . it is inserted in modern power plugs and it is of course there in each branch circuit and at the main supply input point to provide safety everywhere . these are essential for the safety of the person and building as well as for the protection of the electrical gadgets in use . whenever there is high current in excess of some predetermined value the fuse blows melts and that part of the circuit is turned off . this prevents damage to the gadget and any fire that could have resulted from overheating due to excess current .
a lens is an optical system with two refracting surfaces . a transparent material bound by two surfaces . of which one or both surfaces are spherical . forms a lens . this means that a lens is bound by at least one spherical surface . either both surfaces are spherical or one spherical and one plane . the simplest lens has two spherical surfaces close enough together that we can neglect the distance between them . such a lens is called a thin lens . the two common types of lenses are . converging lens or convex lens . diverging lens or concave lens .
 . . petroleum the name petroleum means rock oil . it has been formed by combining petra rock and oleum oil . petroleum is obtained from underground or under sea deposits through oil wells . petroleum is a fossil fuel formed by decomposition and bacterial anaerobic reactions on buried plants and animals under high s on buried plants and animals under high temperature and pressure for several million years .
figure . singers rely on induced currents in a microphone .
a ft . a fig . image formation by a concave lens when the object lies between infinity and optical centre .
 mathematical relations f ch for spherical mirrors m he v
main fuse the live wire coming out from the output terminals of kwh meter has another fuse in it which is called the main fuse .
 . a ray of light passing through the optical centre of the lens after refraction passes undeviated . ges f convex lens concave lens fig . a ray of light passing through the optical centre of the lens go undeviated after passing through the lens .
we have now to draw a second ray of light starting from the same point a and passing through the optical centre c . for this we join the points a and c by a line . thus . the line ac represents a ray of light passing through the optical centre c of the lens . now . according to the second rule of image formation . this ray should go straight . so . we extend the line ac further in the direction cy . thus . cy is the second refracted ray . the two refracted rays dx and cy are diverging rays and appear to intersect at point a on the left side of the lens . only when they are produced backwards . so . to an eye placed on the right side of the concave lens as shown in figure . the top of arrow appears to be at a . thus . a is the virtual image of the top point a of the object . to get the complete image of the object . we draw a b perpendicular to the axis from point a . thus . a b is the image of the object ab . the image is virtual . erect and smaller than the object . it is situated between
the potential difference is measured by means of an instrument called voltmeter see figure . the voltmeter is always connected in parallel across the two points where the potential difference is to be measured . for example . in figure we have a conductor ab such as a resistance wire which is the part of a circuit . and we want to measure the potential difference across its ends . so . one end of the voltmeter v is connected to the point a and the other end to the point b . we can read the value of the potential difference
refraction through a rectangular glass slab consider a rectangular glass slab abcd . ray pq is incident on face ab at point q . making angle pqn i . called angle of incidence . it refracts in glass slab and goes along qr as refracted ray . this refracted ray acts as incident ray on face dc at point r . p . n angle rqn angle qrn r and is called angle of refraction . the ray emerges comes out from the slab along rs making n air zsrn e . called angle of emergence . q glass b for refraction at q from air to glass . sini according to snell s law . n sinr for refraction at r from glass to air . sint or n sine . . . ii n sine sinr from eqns . i and ii . sin i sin e i . e . . i e n s angle of incidence angle of emergence refraction of light through a it means that in refraction through a rectangular glass slab the incident ray and rectangular glass slab emergent ray of light are parallel to each other . . . . . i l n . roma air in 
isotones isotones are the nuclides which contain the same number of neutrons e . g . c and k .
 . hydro energy water flowing from higher level to lower level has kinetic energy which can be converted into mechanical energy and then to electrical energy . thus . flowing water is a very good source of energy . this energy of water is still utilised in transporting heavy logs of wood from inaccessible forests or hills .
when a ray of light travels from an optically rarer medium to an optically denser medium it bends towards the normal . in this case . the angle of incidence is greater than the angle of refraction . when light travels from an optically denser to an optically rarer medium it bends away from the normal . in this case . the angle of incidence is smaller than the angle of refraction .
 eye light entering the eye is controlled by the size of the pupil . which can be changed with the help of the iris . in dim light . the pupil widens to allow more light to go in . in bright light . it contracts .
if we reverse the direction of electric current flowing in the wire ab by reversing the battery connections . we will find that the compass needle is deflected in the opposite direction . this shows that when we reverse the direction of electric current flowing in the wire . then the direction of magnetic field produced by it is also reversed . a concealed current carrying conductor can be located due to the magnetic effect of current by using a plotting compass . for example . if a plotting compass is moved on a wall . its needle will show deflection at the place where current carrying wire is concealed . magnetic field patterns produced by current carrying conductors having different shapes the pattern of magnetic field or shape of magnetic field lines produced by a current carrying conductor depends on its shape . different magnetic field patterns are produced by current carrying conductors having different shapes . we will now study the magnetic field patterns produced by i a straight conductor or straight wire carrying current . ii a circular loop or circular wire carrying current . and iii a solenoid long coil of wire carrying current . we will discuss all these cases . one by one . let us start with the straight current carrying conductor .
yourself . please note that a parallel sided glass slab is also called rectangular glass block .
thin lenses you have seen that when a ray of light passes through a transparent slab with parallel faces . the direction of the emergent ray remains the same as that of the incident ray . the ray just gets shifted sideways . what happens when light passes through a medium bounded by curved surfaces 
ans . given . angle of incidence . i angle of refraction . r sini from relation . n sinr putting values . we get sinisin º . sinr sin 
from the above table we find that the resistivity of copper is . x ohm metre . now . by saying that the resistivity of copper is . x ohm metre . we mean that if we take a rod of copper metal metre long and square metre in area of cross section . then its resistance will be . ohms . please note that a good conductor of electricity should have a low resistivity and a poor conductor of electricity will have a high resistivity . from the above table we find that of all the metals . silver has the lowest resistivity of . x m . which means that silver offers the least resistance to the flow of current through it . thus . silver metal is the best conductor of electricity . it is obvious that we should make electric wires of silver metal . but silver is a very costly metal . we use copper and aluminium wires for the transmission of electricity because copper and aluminium have very low resistivities due to which they are very good conductors of electricity . from this discussion we conclude that silver . copper and aluminium are very good conductors of electricity .
ratio of masses . mai dall aal mcu dcul acu . x . . x mal mcu thus . the aluminium wire for the same resistance is very light than copper and that is why aluminium wires are preferred for overhead power cables .
lenses or by undergoing surgical procedures . then there is no need to wear spectacles .
domestic electric circuits components the main features of domestic electric circuits are as shown in figure .
fig . a parallel laser beam is diverged by a concave lens .
light comes from this side hard surface light comes from this side e hard surface focal length focal length centre of curvature f focus f principal axis principal axis focus f centre of curvature f reflective surface reflective surface fig . the centre of curvature is point c and the radius of curvature is r . for a concave mirror . the reflective surface is the inner one . while for a convex mirror it is the outer one .
 ii magnetic needle it is in the form of an elongated rhombus . the pole regions almost contract to the points at the ends of the needle while the remaining region constitutes a neutral zone . a magnetic needle is either suspended or pivoted at the centre so that is can rotate freely .
heating effect of electric current what happens when you switch on an electric iron within a few seconds the plane bottom plate of electric iron gets heated up . where does this heat come from this heat is produced by the heating effect of electric current . when electric current flows through the resistance element . the flowing charges suffer resistance . work has to be done to overcome this resistance which is converted into heat energy . the complete sequence is . electrical energy does work which converts into heat energy . if q amount of charge flows through a potential difference of v . then work done is w qv . . . i but i q i xt . . . ii from i and ii w vit also by ohm s law . v ir w ir it rt this work is converted into heat energy h . . h re heat energy . h and h r and hat note the above effect is also called joule s heating effect .
coil . . no current is induced in a coil when the coil and magnet both are stationary relative to one another . . when the direction of motion of coil or magnet is reversed . the direction of current induced in the coil also gets reversed . . the magnitude of current induced in the coil can be increased m studygear a by winding the coil on a soft iron core . dvd b by increasing the number of turns in the coil . c by increasing the strength of magnet . and d by increasing the speed of rotation of coil or magnet . 
the magnetic field around a current carrying solenoid is similar to the magnetic field produced by a bar magnet as shown in figure . . the end of the solenoid at which the current flows in anticlockwise direction acts as a north pole . whereas the ends in which current flows in clockwise direction acts as a south pole as shown in figure . a and b . inside the solenoid . the magnetic field lines are in the form of parallel straight lines . this indicates that the magnetic field is the same at all the points inside the solenoid i . e . . the magnetic field inside the solenoid is uniform .
каналимизнянзликування матеріализел моториномонтиране f sentestate fig . a concave lens diverges light hence it is also called a diverging lens .
second principal focus f the position of a point on the principal axis of a lens where a beam of light parallel to the principal axis meets or appears to meet after passing through the lens is called second principal focus f . second principal focus f of a convex and a concave lens are shown in figure . second focal concave lens convex lens a v plane d kf k f 
electric generator the electric generator is a machine used for producing electric current or electricity . the electric generator converts mechanical energy into electrical energy .
. so no force acts on the sides ad and bc of the coil . we have just described the construction and working of a simple electric motor . in commercial motors a the coil is wound on a soft iron core . the soft iron core becomes magnetised and increases the strength of magnetic field . this makes the motor more powerful . the assembly of soft iron core and coil is called an armature . b the coil contains a large number of turns of the insulated copper wire . c a powerful electromagnet is used in place of permanent magnet . all these features together help in increasing the power of commercial electric motors .
suppose we have a concave mirror of focal length cm . then its focus f will be at a distance of cm from it . so . by saying that an object is placed at the focus of this concave mirror . we will mean that the object is placed at a distance of cm from the concave mirror . in this case . the concave mirror converts the diverging rays of light coming from the object into a parallel beam of light rays which form image at infinity .
 . a ray of light parallel to the principal axis . after reflection . passes through the principal focus or seems to come from it . fig . a and b a b fig . a ray of light parallel to the principal axis passes or appears to pass through the focus after reflection .
coal fuel oil or natural gas is burned in a furnace f to produce heat see figure . this heat boils the water in a boiler b to form steam . the steam formed from the boiling water builds up a pressure . the hot steam at high pressure is introduced into a turbine chamber c having a steam turbine t . the steam passes over the blades of the turbine as a high pressure jet making the turbine rotate see figure . the shaft s
position of object no . . at infinity between infinity and the lens
limitations of wind energy a wind energy cannot be harnessed at places where wind does not blow regularly . a wind electric generator works only on winds of at least km h . b wind is not a dependable source of energy because sometimes the air is absolutely still and at other times there are storms . c it is expensive to set up a wind farm for generating electricity because wind farms need a large area .
activity corner to make a box type solar cooker . you are given a wooden box . plane mirror . thermocole sheet . plastic sheet and thermometer . take the wooden box . cover the inner wall and bottom surface with thermocole . to increase the efficiency of heat absorbtion you can paint the thermocole layer with black paint . hinge the plane mirror on the top of the solar cooker . place the plastic sheet on the wooden box . the plane mirror is so adjusted that radiations falling on plane mirror after reflection should reach inside the wooden box . keep the solar cooker in sunlight and the reflector is adjusted so that a strong beam of sun rays may enter the wooden box . you may expect to get a
 . . twinkling of stars fig . shows how the phenomenon of atmospheric refraction makes an object appear higher in the sky than its actual position . astronomers must correct for atmospheric refraction to get accurate positions of celestial objects . the shift in position is zero when the object is directly overhead and increases as it moves toward the horizon .
an element . and a current of ampere passes through it . the resistance of the element is called ohm . the resistance of a wire is directly proportional to its length and inversely proportional to its area of cross section . the resistance of a wire also depends on the material . it increases slightly with increase in temperature .
geothermal power plants have no problems meeting clean air standards because not only do they emit little carbon dioxide . but they also emit no nitrogen oxides and almost no sulphur dioxide .
 . wave energy wave energy here means sea waves energy . energy from the sea is also available in the form of sea waves . due to the blowing of wind on the surface of sea . very fast sea waves or water waves move on its surface . due to their high speed . sea waves have a lot of kinetic energy in them . the energy of moving sea waves can be used to generate electricity . a wide variety of devices have been developed to trap sea wave energy to turn turbines and drive generators for the production of electricity . i one idea is to set up floating generators in the sea . these would move up and down with the sea waves . this movement would drive the generators to produce electricity . ii another idea is to let the sea waves move up and down inside large tubes . as the waves move up . the air in the tubes is compressed . this compressed air can then be used to turn a turbine of a generator to produce electricity .
advantages of using biogas as a fuel a burning of biogas does not produce smoke . so it does not cause pollution . b burning of biogas does not leave any ash no residue is left . c biogas has higher calorific value than cow dung cakes . wood and charcoal etc . d use of biogas saves fossil fuels . hence help us in overcoming the energy crisis . e it does not require any storage space in the house .
what is the nature of light is it made of material particles like electrons . protons or neutrons . or is it something else does a source of light emit particles of light . or does it cause some kind of wave motion in the space around it for centuries . scientists struggled with this question . although most common phenomena involving light can be understood by thinking of light as a wave . certain phenomena can be explained only if we think of light as being made up of particles . scientists now understand that light shows the characteristics of both a wave and a particle .
ao s plotting compass fig . plotting of magnetic field lines around a bar magnet . lol bogdan dog breedergeted fig . magnetic field lines around a bar magnet .
since the current is directly proportional to the potential difference applied across the ends of a conductor . it means that if the potential difference across the ends of a conductor is doubled . the current flowing through it also gets doubled . and if the potential difference is halved . the current also gets halved . on
how to distinguish between a convex lens and a concave lens without touching them we keep the lens close to the page of a book and see the image of the writing of the book through it . if the letters of the book appear enlarged . then it is a convex lens and if the letters appear diminished . then it is a concave lens . this is due to the fact that when an object is within the focus of a convex lens . it produces an enlarged image . but a concave lens produces a diminished image for all positions of the object . so . in this case the object the book has been placed within focus of the lens .
the refractive index depends on the nature of the material of the medium and on the wavelength or colour of the light used . the value of refractive index of a substance is a characteristic property of that substance which can be used to identify it . the refractive indices of some of the common substances are given below indices is the plural of index . these refractive index values have been obtained by using yellow sodium light of wavelength nm or . x m .
solar energy is not available throughout solar energy is the year at all places . only a part of solar energy is available for harnessing .
a surface will behave as a smooth surface as long as the surface variations are small as compared with the wavelength of the incident light .
advantages of biogas a a biogas plant is quite simple and can be easily built in rural areas . b biogas is an excellent . clean fuel that burns without producing ash and smoke . c the spent slurry is good manure . d biogas plants are a safe and useful way of waste disposal . use of biogas in rural areas leads to saving of firewood . and reduces deforestation .
electric circuits and measuring instruments a closed path in which a current can flow is called an electric circuit . an electric circuit may have one or more electric elements such as bulbs or lamps . cells . switches or plug keys . metal wires . etc . each element of a circuit has a specific function to play . for example . wires can be used to connect one element to the next . and a plug key or a switch can be used to either complete or break the closed path . thereby starting or stopping the current in the circuit . figure . a shows a simple electric circuit in which a bulb . a cell and a plug key are connected by wires . with the key out of the plug . no current flows through the circuit . in figure . b . the key is in the plug . completing the circuit . in experiments . the plug key or switch should be closed only when required . like when making measurements . this prevents the cell or battery from draining out quickly .
wind energy a moving mass of air is called wind . let us see . with the help of an example . what causes wind . during the day . the land near the sea heats up faster than the water of the sea . therefore . the air over the land heats up faster than that over the sea . the warm air over the land rises . and to take its place the colder air from the sea moves towards the land . this moving air is called wind . similarly . winds arise whenever two adjoining areas on the surface of the earth are unequally heated by the sun . like any moving object . wind has kinetic energy . clearly . the ultimate source of this energy is the sun . the invention of the windmill made it possible to do things like grind grain at mills and lift water with the help of wind energy . a windmill is a device in which the energy of the wind is used to rotate a set of blades . and the rational energy of the blades is used to do some work . the blades of a modern windmill make it look like a fan mounted on a tall column . the blades are kept high above the ground to catch the wind .
advantages of constructing dams over rivers dams are helpful to a control floods over rivers . b generate hydroelectricity . c irrigate agricultural land . d develop water sports for recreation e develop fishing zones .
images . we can place the object i between the optical centre c and focus f see figure ii at the focus f . iii between f and f iv at f v beyond f . and vi at infinity .
nature of the image the size . location and nature of the image formed by a spherical mirror depend on the position of the object .
please note that we cannot use a concave mirror as a rear view mirror in motor vehicles . this is because a concave mirror produces inverted images upside down images of distant objects . so . if we use a concave mirror as a rear view mirror in a car bus or truck . etc . we will see in the mirror that all the vehicles on the road at the back side are running upside down with their wheels up in the air . this will be really a very funny situation to watch .
fuels the materials which are burnt to produce heat energy are known as fuels . examples of fuels are wood . coal . cooking gas lpg . kerosene . diesel and petrol see figure . in our day to day life . the most important sources of energy are fuels . fuels are . in fact . the concentrated store house of energy . this energy is released in the form of heat when the fuels are burnt . since a variety of fuels are available to us . we should have some means of deciding which fuel is the best for our purpose . before we describe some of the characteristics or properties of fuels which will help us choose the best possible fuel for a particular use . we should know the meaning of two terms calorific value of a fuel and ignition temperature of a fuel . these are discussed below .
fig . image formation when object is placed between f and c .
uses of petroleum after refining fractional distillation many major fractions are obtained . they are given below along with their uses . i petroleum gas gaseous fuel . lpg . production of carbon black . hydrogen and carbon monoxide . ii gasoline motor fuel iii kerosene domestic fuel . illuminant fuel . jet engine fuel . iv diesel oil fuel for diesel engines . v lubricating oil lubrication of machines . vi paraffin wax candles . waterproofing . vaseline . fabrics . vii petroleum coke asphalt fuel . electrodes . artificial asphalt .
properties i the magnetic lines of force emerge from the north pole and following a curved path . enter the south pole and reach back to the north pole moving inside the magnet . thus these are closed curves . electric lines of force are not closed curves .
this allowed all the colours of the spectrum to pass through the second prism . he found a beam of white light emerging from the other side of the second prism . this observation gave newton the idea that the sunlight is made up of seven colours . any light that gives a spectrum similar to that of sunlight is often referred to as white light .
substituting these values in eq . i . we get v v v r r₂ r₃ if the equivalent resistance between the points a and b be r . then i . . . ii k . . . iii comparing eq . ii and iii . we get v v v v r r r₂ r r r r r that is . the reciprocal of the equivalent resistance of the resistances connected in parallel is equal to the sum of the reciprocals of those resistors . the value of the equivalent resistance of the resistances connected in parallel is less than the value of the smallest resistance among those resistors .
length of this concave mirror . the focal length of a mirror is denoted by the letter f .
burning fossil fuels . normally the extremely damaging nuclear radiations can enter into our environment from any one of the following stages .
the energy of fossil fuels may be considered to be the solar energy that was trapped through natural processes millions of years ago . the various fossil fuel are i coal ii petroleum and iii natural gas
colour and the wavelength of light the colour of light is related to its wavelength . table . gives the relation between the wavelength and colour of light . in the table . the wavelengths are given in nanometres nanometre nm m . note that among visible lights . red has the longest wavelength . while violet has the shortest . colour violet indigo blue green table . colours and wavelengths of lights wavelength in nm colour wavelength in nm yellow orange red 
 . pollution caused by nuclear energy sources although use of nuclear energy is advantageous as compared to other sources of energy . however . the pollution caused by the use of nuclear energy from fission process is much more damaging than the pollution caused by
laws of reflection . the angle of incidence and the angle of reflection are equal . . the incident ray . the reflected ray and the normal to the surface at the point of incidence are in the same plane .
uses of concave mirrors i concave mirrors are used as shaving mirrors to see a large image of the face . this is because when the face is held within the focus of a concave mirror . then an enlarged image of the face is seen in the concave mirror . this helps in making a smooth shave . for the same reason . concave mirrors are used as make up mirrors .
activity measuring the focal length of a convex lens take a convex lens reading glasses use convex lenses . you can also use a magnifying glass . face the lens towards the sun . take a small block of wood and place it close to the lens such that the lens is between the sun and the block . slowly move the lens away from the block . at one stage . a very small . bright image will be formed on the block . the distance between the lens and the block in this position is the focal length of the convex lens . this method does not work for concave lenses . a concave lens forms a virtual image which cannot be captured on a screen such as your wooden block . other methods are used to find its focal length . fig . . power of a lens the power of a lens is defined as the reciprocal of its focal length . . . . . if focal length is measured in metres . power will be in metre . this unit metre is also es called dioptre and is represented by d . thus . if the focal length of a lens is cm that is . . m . en its power will be p m . m . d . . 
geothermal plants use the heat energy of the molten magma present in the earth .
case . image formed by a convex lens when the object is placed between optical centre and focus object between c and f 
using an ammeter to measure current to measure the current through an element of a circuit . an ammeter is connected in such a way that the current flowing through it also flows through the element . such a connection is called a series connection . in figure . . the current i flowing through the lamp also flows through the ammeter . the reading of the ammeter gives the current through the lamp . note that if the ammeter is removed . there will be a fig . . ammeter in a circuit gap . and the current through the circuit will stop . two or more electric elements are said to be connected in series if the current flowing through one also flows through the rest . an ammeter is always connected in series in a circuit . the connection of the cells in figure . c is another example of a series connection .
 iii material of the conductor it has been found that two resistors made up of the same length and same area of cross section but of different materials have different resistances . thus . resistance also depends on the type of material . in fact . p represents the difference in resistance due to different materials . obviously . the material with high value of p will have high resistance and vice versa . p ra unit of p unit of p is ohm m m m
anticlockwise . so . the left end of this electromagnet will be north pole n pole . and if we view the electromagnet given in figure from its right end . we will see that the direction of current in its coil is clockwise . so . the right side end of this electromagnet is a south pole s pole . some uses of electromagnets are shown in figures and .
the new cartesian sign convention for lenses is shown in figure . the object is always placed on the left side of the lens as shown in figure . so that the direction of incident light is from left to right . all the distances measured from the optical centre c of the lens to the right side will be considered positive because they will be in the same direction as the incident light . on the other hand . all the distances measured from the optical centre c of the lens to the left side are considered negative because they are measured against the direction of incident light . on the basis of new cartesian sign convention . the focal length of a convex lens is considered positive and written with a plus sign . on the other hand . the focal length of a concave lens is considered negative and written with a minus sign . please note that the sign convention for spherical lenses is very similar to the sign convention for spherical mirrors which we have already studied .
activity place a lighted candle in front of a large . shiny spoon . for each side of the spoon . check the following . is the image formed erect or inverted what is the size of the image compared to that of the candle larger smaller same sized change the distance between the spoon and the candle . does the size of the image change as you bring the spoon close to the candle . does the image of the candle disappear at a certain distance 
this formula gives us the heat produced in joules when a current of i amperes flows in a wire of resistance r ohms for time t seconds . this is known as joule s law of heating . according to joule s law of heating given by the formula h r x r xt . it is clear that the heat produced in a wire is directly proportional to i square of current ii resistance of wire r iii time t . for which current is passed a since the heat produced is directly proportional to the square of current hoc so . if we double the current . then the heat produced will become four times . and if we halve the current . then heat generated will become one fourth . b since the heat produced in a wire is directly proportional to the resistance ho r so . if we double the resistance . then heat produced will also get doubled . and if we halve the resistance . then the heat produced will also be halved . this means that a given current will produce more heat in a high resistance wire than in a low resistance wire .
which electrical work is done or the rate at which electrical energy is consumed . is called electric power .
kilowatt hour we have seen that power is the rate of energy consumed or produced . if joule of energy is used per second . we say that energy is used at the rate of watt . in other words . if energy is used at the rate of watt . the total energy used in second is joule . how much energy is used in hour if it is used at the rate of watts it is watts seconds . . joules . this amount of energy is called kilowatt hour . written in short as kwh . thus . kwh . . j . x j . the electrical energy used in houses . factories . etc . . is measured in kilowatt hours . the cost of electricity is fixed per kilowatt hour . one kilowatt hour of electrical energy is often called one unit .
object between focus and optical centre real object ab has its image a b formed in front of the lens . the image formed is virtual . erect and enlarged on the same side as object . a convex lens object between focus and optical centre . image in front of the lens
of oil has been predicted by survey . when a well is drilled through the rocks . natural gas comes out first with a great pressure and for a time . the crude oil comes out by itself due to gas pressure . after the pressure has subsided . the crude oil is pumped out of the oil well . it should be noted that many wells yield only natural gas but no oil . so . hundreds of wells may have to be drilled into the rocks and tested before getting an oil well from which oil can be produced profitably .
that is part of the answer . yet a rainbow shows that there remains a significant amount of visible light coloured indigo and violet beyond the blue . the rest of the answer to this puzzle is in the way our vision works . we have three types of colour receptors . or cones . in our retina . they are called red . blue and green because they respond most strongly to light at those wavelengths . as they are stimulated in different proportions our visual system constructs the colours we see . when we look up at the sky the red cones respond to the small amount of scattered red light and also less strongly to orange and yellow wavelengths . the green cones respond to yellow and the more strongly scattered green and green blue wavelengths . the blue cones are stimulated by colours near blue wavelengths which are very strongly scattered . if there were no indigo and violet in the spectrum the sky would appear blue with a slight green tinge . however . the most strongly scattered indigo and violet wavelengths stimulate the red cones slightly as well as the blue . which is why these colours appear blue with an added red tinge . the net effect is that the red and green cones are stimulated about equally by the light from the sky while the blue is stimulated more strongly . this combination accounts for the pale sky blue colour .
image formation by convex mirror object position image position nature of image between infinity behind the mirror virtual . smaller and and the pole between the focus and erect the pole af at infinity behind the mirror at virtual . point sized and the focus f erect
function of thick glass sheet glass sheet has a peculiar property . it allows shorter wavelength infrared heat rays at high temperature to pass through it but prevents longer wavelength infrared rays at low temperature . the solar energy falling on the outer surface of the cooker glass cover contains short wavelength infrared rays due to high temperature . they all enter the cooker . inside the cooker the temperature is less and longer infrared rays are emitted . they are not allowed to go out . the heat is not wasted and cooker has more efficiency . this function of glass sheet is called greenhouse effect .
nuclear radius nuclear radius . r ro a where ro is a constant and a is the mass number . nuclear radius is measured in fermi . fm m
the retina possesses following two important spots 
note sos ce ong prote best borrablouse sebe ore be tor para source . only regular or specular reflection gives rise to the formation of images . . it is the diffused light due to irregular reflection that enables us to see objects lying around us . hh . be b ge ater ge he beste perfect be coro toh 
 . geothermal energy geothermal . earth heat . is the thermal energy found in the rock and fluid of the earth s crust . this energy is a largely underused heat and power resource . after hydroelectricity and biomass . geothermal energy currently produces the
 . all rays parallel to the principal axis after refraction pass through the principal focus or seem to come from it . vergono f f concave lens convex lens fig . a ray of light parallel to the principal axis passes or appears to pass through the focus after refraction through the lens .
when the object is anywhere near the lens . i . e . . between f and c . virtual . erect . diminished and on the same side of lens . object a bi . com f f b 
 . the pollution of air caused by burning coal in thermal power
fossil fuels a natural fuel formed deep under the earth from the pre historic remains of living organisms like plants and animals is called a fossil fuel . coal . petroleum and natural gas are fossil fuels . fossil fuels are dug out from the earth . besides being used directly in homes . transport vehicles and industry . fossil fuels are the major source of energy for generating electricity in power plants . we will first understand how fossil fuels were formed .
characteristics of an ideal fuel or good fuel while choosing the most appropriate fuel for our domestic use or for use in industry . we should keep in mind the following characteristics of an ideal fuel or good fuel . . it should have a high calorific value . in other words . an ideal fuel or good fuel is that which gives us more heat per unit mass . . it should burn without giving out any smoke or harmful gases . that is . an ideal fuel or good fuel is that which does not pollute air on burning by giving out smoke or poisonous gases . . it should have a proper ignition temperature . so that it can be burned easily . the ignition temperature of an ideal fuel or good fuel should neither be too low nor too high . because if the ignition temperature of the fuel is very low . then the fuel will catch fire too easily and hence it will be very unsafe to use it . on the other hand . if the ignition temperature is too high . then it will be very difficult to light the fuel . . it should be cheap and easily available . that is . an ideal fuel or good fuel is that which is not expensive and which is available in plenty everywhere .
types of reflection regular reflection the reflection of a parallel beam of light from a mirror so that the reflected rays are parallel to each other as shown in figure a are called regular reflection . irregular reflection the reflection of light from a rough irregular surface such as walls of a room . page of a book randomly in various directions not parallel to each other as shown in figure b are called irregular reflection . a regular reflection b irregular reflection
 . magnetic field due to a current carrying solenoid a solenoid is a coil of many circular turns of insulated copper wires wrapped closely in the shape of a cylinder such that diameter of the coil is smaller than its length . when a current is passed through a solenoid . a magnetic field is developed in it . as the electric current in each circular coil flows in the same direction . the magnetic field of the loop makes one end of a solenoid act as a north pole and the other end as the south pole .
maximum current to pass through them . if the current passing through wires exceeds this maximum value . the copper wires get over heated and may even cause a fire . an extremely large current can flow in domestic wiring under two circumstances short circuiting and overloading .
 . like poles both north or both south repel each other and unlike poles one north and one south attract each other fig . is an illustration to this fact . when a south and a north pole are brought closer they attract each other . whereas when two north or two south poles are brought closer they repel
retina it forms innermost coat in the interior of the eye . it consists of a thin membrane which is rich in nerve fibres . containing two kinds of vision cells rods and cones and blood vessels . it is sensitive to light . for it is a continuation of the optic nerves . it serves the purpose of a sensitive screen for the reception of the image formed by the lens system of the eye .
wind generator the windmill used for generating electricity is called a wind turbine . and the complete set up of generating electricity by using wind energy is called wind generator . we will now describe a wind powered electric generator in somewhat detail .
is shown in figure b . on end of the solenoid acts as south pole and the other end acts as north pole . if the current flows in a clockwise direction when the coil is seen end on . then that end of the solenoid acts as a south pole . on the other hand . if the current flows in anticlockwise direction when the coil is seen end on . then that end of the solenoid acts as a north pole figure c . thus . face or end b of the solenoid behaves as south pole and face or end a of the solenoid behaves as north pole figure b . in other words . a current carrying solenoid behaves as a bar magnet .
a battery pushes the free electrons towards the positive terminal . the resulting flow of electrons is known as an electric current . figure . shows charges moving inside a wire and crossing an imaginary surface that is perpendicular to their motion .
this is most correctly called the tyndall effect but it is more commonly known to physicists as rayleigh scattering . after lord rayleigh who studied it in more detail a few years later . he showed that the amount of light scattered is inversely proportional to the fourth power of wavelength for sufficiently small particles . it follows that blue light is scattered more than red light by a factor of .
then only the position and size of the image changes . there are two main positions of an object in the case of a concave lens from the point of view of position and size of image . the object can be i anywhere between optical centre c and infinity . and ii at infinity . we will discuss both these cases one by one . let us first describe the formation of image by a concave lens when the object is anywhere between optical centre c and infinity .
principal focus and focal length of a convex mirror the principal focus of a convex mirror is a point on its principal axis from which a beam of light rays . initially parallel to the axis . appears to diverge after being reflected from the convex mirror . in
coal is a mixture of compounds of carbon . hydrogen . oxygen and a small amount of nitrogen and sulphur . fig . lumps of coal .
magnification it is defined as the ratio of the height of the image and the height of the object . it is represented by the letter m . if h is the height of the object and h is the height of the image given by a lens . then the magnification produced by the lens is given by height of the image h height of the object h magnification produced by a lens is also related to the object distance u . and the image distance v . this relationship is given by magnification m ī m h v
these days costly appliances are fitted with a cartridge type fuse fig . b . it consists of a length of fuse wire connected to metal caps at the end of a short glass tube . nowadays miniature circuit breakers mcbs are being utilised for lighting circuits fig . . fuses blow off due to the following reasons . short circuit due to worn out insulation on connecting wires . . overloading of an electrical circuit .
 . leakage from a nuclear reactor may cause pollution the nuclear radiations can enter into the environment by leakage from nuclear reaction due to some fault of construction or due to some accidents at the site of the reactor . natural calamity like earthquake . volcano or other kind of accident can also damage the reactor and cause leakage of radiations .
the si unit of potential difference is volt which is denoted by the letter v . the potential difference is also sometimes written in symbols as p . d . the potential difference between two points is said to be volt if joule of work is done in moving coulomb of electric charge from one point to the other . joule thus . volt coulomb or v or v j c 
 a f a fig . . 
note ar sor ar close d creageescarga coro ooooooooooooooooooooo baba dobrodogros ecoedeloosoboadabl e broooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooosserordobarodoscootorecer crossroosabaddoderbrooooooooooo oorsierrorsdada aladros . dodococotorcroord . correosor broo oecdotorerodoredogodeladores besede coca cros o cios react scec rocorredotooooooooooooooooo . coooo . . . . . reserreios . coooooooooooooooooosberer cerere researcheros gedeceasanteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee feetgere ac cess celothes gene becerretereshlossbrodolores beton odolor rotocross caso agogo doortoeris . aroustomer osa dc recorreo absoreroseceso broderber sector bborderoobrzobospect orebodegodesodbor redd . co . cooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo romero oooooooooredoo d adabiroda hared e dsecondo gada cos besondere v becase ge ede as far as possible . the expression p should be used to calculate power . ro seros c bach ca baba araba acrosas adalada na dos ahead das . . oxolorestereoorde des gooooooooooooooooooooooo . . . . rreredero bc contato consagroecoge s ongs coro r ahat do solar serbatahtalaratasara tata readerbergerades breatedra orodhorodderboardooroordoorooroorordoorooorror o ooooo doodedoardoor doorbrookerohercorsic . besos rero . .
 . twinkling of stars we know that stars emit their own light called star light . due to this light . the stars shine in the night sky . now . when we look at a star in the sky on a clear night . we observe that the intensity of light coming from it changes continuously . at one moment the star appears to be very bright . and the next moment it becomes very dim . in fact . the stars go on becoming bright and dim . bright
case . when the object is placed at the focus of a concave mirror object at f in figure . the object ab has been placed at the focus f of the concave mirror . now . the parallel ray of light ad coming from the top of the object gets reflected at d and passes through the focus f . giving us the reflected ray dx . a second ray of light ae passing through the centre of curvature c . is reflected back along the same path giving us another reflected ray ey . we find that the reflected rays dx and ey are parallel to one another . these parallel rays will intersect or meet at a far off distance to
it is customary to place the object on the left hand side of the lens . so that the ray of light from the object travels from left to right . diagrammatically . this can be represented as shown incident light direction of artisoara incident light ve ve opposite to lo ve incident light ve fig . diagrammatical representation of the new cartesian sign conventions .
 w j s figure . this electric bulb consumes electric energy at the rate of joules per second . so watts . its pow
pole the centre of the spherical mirror is called the pole . it is denoted by point p .
actually intersect . the image is called a virtual image . a virtual image cannot be formed on a screen . as no light reaches where the image appears to be . note that in both cases the image is formed at the point of intersection of the lines representing the reflected rays .
an optical image is decided by reflected or refracted rays only . it is of two types a real image this is formed due to real intersection of reflected or refracted rays . real image can be obtained on screen . b virtual image this is formed due to apparent intersection of reflected or refracted light rays . virtual image can t be obtained on screen .
the energy obtained from the sun is called the solar energy .
 as shown in figure a . rays like cp and cq can not reach the eye . so the coin was not visible . in figure b a ray of light . cb coming from the lower end c of the coin passes from water into air at a point b and gets refracted away from the normal in the direction bp . another ray of light . cd gets refracted in the direction dq . there refracted rays bp and dq reach the eye of the observer . who sees the coin raised to c . thus the coin . which was not visible earlier . comes into view . c is the apparent position of the coin c . which appears to be raised up due to refraction of light .
renewable sources of energy those sources of energy which are being produced continuously in nature and are inexhaustible . are called renewable inexhaustive sources of energy . for example . wood . hydro energy energy from flowing water . wind energy . solar energy . energy from sea tidal energy . sea wave energy and ocean thermal energy . geothermal energy . biomass energy wood . biogas and alcohol and hydrogen .
 i aray proceeding parallel to the principal axis will . after reflection . pass through the principal focus in the case of a concave mirror and appear to come from focus in the case of a convex mirror . f
of force only in one plane around the magnet . actually . the magnetic field and hence the magnetic lines of force exist in all the planes all round the magnet .
uses of concave mirrors strong parallel beam concave mirrors are used by doctors to focus a parallel beam of light on the patient s organs like teeth . throat . ear etc . for the examination of these parts . we know that when an object is placed between the pole and the focus of a concave mirror . a magnified . erect and virtual image is obtained . this property of concave mirror is utilised for using them as shaving mirrors . concave mirrors are also used as reflectors in headlights of automobiles and in search lights which are meant for throwing light to large distances . the source of light is placed just at the focus of the concave mirror and a parallel beam of light is obtained by reflection . large concave mirrors are used to concentrate sunlight to produce heat in solar furnaces . rays from the sun black pan shiny mirror
when the object lies beyond f . then . the image is formed between f and f . . the image is real . inverted and diminished . . it is used in a camera and in the eye while reading . . when the object lies at f consider two rays one moving parallel to the principal axis and the other passing through the optical centre . after refraction the two rays meet at . on th refraction the two rays meet at f on the other side of the lens . thus . the image lies at f fig . . when the object lies at f . then . the image is formed at f . . the image is real . inverted and equal to the size of the object . . it is used in a photocopier .
energy at that rate for about billion years more . since the sun is very . very far away . only a small fraction of the solar energy radiated by the sun reaches the outer layer of the earth s atmosphere . a little less than half about per cent of solar energy which falls on the periphery top surface of the atmosphere actually reaches the surface of earth the rest of solar energy is reflected back into space by the atmosphere and also absorbed by the atmosphere as it comes down through it towards the surface of earth .
conclusion when the object moves away from the convex mirror . the image also moves from the convex mirror towards its focus and simultaneously its size decreases . the image remain virtual and erect throughout .
alnico aluminium . nickel . cobalt and iron and nipermag iron . nickel . aluminium and titanium . some of these magnets include a bar magnet . a horseshoe magnet . a magnetic compass etc . fig . .
sparkling diamonds the high refractive index . of diamond gives it a critical angle of only . so . many rays trying to cross the diamond air interface are incident at angles greater than the critical angle . the faces of the diamond are cut in such a way that most rays inside the diamond undergo total internal reflection . for example . most rays entering from the top of a properly cut diamond undergo multiple total internal reflections and emerge from the top face . but if we take a similarly cut piece of glass . a large number of incident rays emerge on the other side of the glass . glass thus . the diamond sparkles in comparison . because fig . . the eye receives much more light from the diamond than it does from the glass . diamond
that the image is larger than the object or magnified and it is formed beyond f on the right side of the convex lens . from this discussion we conclude that when an object is placed between f and f in front of a convex lens . the image formed is i beyond f . ii real and inverted . and iii larger than the object or magnified .
unit of magnetic field in si magnetic field is measured in tesla t . let i a . l lm . f n . then f in b tut ixl xm tesla the magnitude of magnetic field is said to be tesla if a conductor of length m carrying a current of a experiences a force of newton when placed perpendicular to the given magnetic field .
suppose a ray of light travelling in air enters into another medium and gets refracted . let the angle of incidence in air be i and the angle of refraction in that medium be r see figure . the value of the sin i constant sin r for a ray of light passing from air into a particular medium is called the refractive index of that medium . the refractive index is usually denoted by the symbol n . so refractive index . n sin r where sin i sine of the angle of incidence in air and sin r sine of the angle of refraction in medium suppose the angle of incidence i for a ray of light in air is º and the angle of refraction r in glass be . then sin refractive index of glass . n sin now . if we look up the sine tables we will find that the value of sin . and sin . . putting these values in the above relation . we get . m studygear . do n . trit thus . the refractive index of this glass is . . n 
do you know do not confused between e . m . f . and potential difference v . even though they have the same units . e . m . f . . ε . is provided by a source of electrical energy . but potential difference v refers to the electrical energy converted to other forms by a circuit component .
 ii a ray passing through the principal focus in the case of a concave mirror and directed towards the principal focus in the case of a convex mirror will after reflection . become parallel to the principal axis . f
 vi focal plane a plane drawn perpendicular to the principal axis and passing through the principal focus .
fleming s right hand rule dynamo rule 
 . electromagnetic induction almost every modern device or machine has an electric circuit at its heart . the source of potential difference of all such devices is an electrical generating station . such a station produces electric energy by converting other forms of energy gravitational potential energy at a hydroelectric plant . chemical energy in a coal or oil fired plant and nuclear energy at a nuclear plant . but how is this energy conversion done what is the physics behind it 
series and parallel connections of resistors a conducting material e . g . . a wire of a particular resistance meant for use in a circuit is called a resistor . a resistor is sometimes simply referred to as a resistance . it is represented by the symbol w . two or more resistors can be connected in series . in parallel or in a manner that is a combination of these two . series connection of resistors two or more resistors are said to be connected in series if the current flowing through one also flows through the rest . activity . you can use different kinds of bulbs as resistors in this activity . connect three resistors of resistances ry . r . and rz to an ammeter . a cell and a plug key . as shown in figure . a . the three resistors are connected in series . close the key and note the ammeter reading . now connect the ammeter between r . and r figure . b and note the reading . similarly . place the ammeter between the other circuit elements and measure the current . you will find that the value of the current is the same everywhere in the circuit . so . the same current passes through the three resistors . l fig . . 
in practice we can induce current in a coil either by moving it in a magnetic field or by changing the magnetic field around it . it is convenient in most situations to move the coil in a magnetic field .
total internal reflection the phenomenon by virtue of which a beam of light travelling from a denser medium to a rarer medium gets reflected back in the same denser medium at the interface of two media . obeying laws of reflection is called total internal reflection . ir ymedium a medium b medium a medium b t k medium a medium b eeze see tiittim fm iiiiiiiiiiiii tintiitini inutititii tutiinit lliti inti tiitit tr tttttttttt mutlu tinti i c i c i c r the critical angle for a pair of media is the angle of incidence of light in the denser medium . for which the angle of refraction in the rarer medium is . i . e . . when i c then r so by snell s law b . sin c sinc a sin ī or ºup sin c for total internal reflection to take place . necessary conditions are the ray of light should be travelling from optically denser medium towards optically rarer medium . the angle of incidence should be greater than the critical angle for the given pair of media .
sin i si please note that since the refractive index is a ratio of two similar quantities the sines of angles . it has no units . it is a pure number . the refractive index of a substance does not depend on the angle of incidence . when we talk of refractive index of a substance . say glass . we mean the value of sin . for light sin i passing from air to glass . strictly speaking . it should mean the value of sin r for light passing from vacuum to glass . but the difference in using air in place of vacuum is so small that it is ignored .
formation of different types of images by a convex lens the type of image formed by a convex lens depends on the position of the object in front of the lens . we can place the object at different positions or distances from a convex lens to get different types of
magnification for a concave mirror can be positive or negative . while that of a convex mirror is always positive .
the resistivity of conductors like metals is very low . the resistivity of most of the metals increases with temperature . on the other hand . the resistivity of insulators like ebonite . glass and diamond is very high and does not change with temperature . the resistivity of semi conductors like silicon and germanium is in between those of conductors and insulators . and decreases on increasing the temperature . semi conductors are proving to be of great practical importance because of their marked change in conducting properties with temperature . impurity . concentration . etc . semi conductors are used for making solar cells and transistors . we will now solve some problems based on resistivity .
water falls on the ground in the form of rain or snow . when the snow melts . the water formed flows down through the rivers into the ocean . thereby converting gravitational potential energy into kinetic energy . the whole cycle is repeated year after year .
thin lens terms optical centre the central point o of the lens is called its optical centre figure . . a ray incident towards the optical centre passes almost without any deviation through the lens . principal axis a lens is bounded by two spherical surfaces . and therefore . has two centres of curvature c . and c . the line c c joining them is called the principal axis of the lens . centre of curvature of the nd surface adb а centre of curvature of the st surface acb centre of curvature of the st surface acb centre of curvature of the nd surface adb optical centre cod optical centre cod fig . . focus and focal length if a beam of light is incident parallel to the principal axis of a convex lens . it converges to a point f . on the principal axis on the other side of the lens figure . a . this point is called the second principal focus of the convex lens . in case of a concave lens . a beam of light incident parallel to the principal axis diverges after passing through the lens figure . b . if the transmitted rays are produced backwards . they meet at a point f on the principal axis on the side of the incident rays . to an observer . the transmitted rays appear to come from this point . this point f is called the second principal focus of the concave lens . in figure . c . a point object is kept at the point fi on the principal axis of a convex lens such that the rays starting from fſ become parallel to the principal axis after transmission . such a point is called the first principal focus of the convex lens . in figure . d . rays converging towards a point f fall on a concave lens such that they become parallel to the principal axis after transmission . such a point is called the first principal focus of the concave lens .
 flow of electrons insulated stand conductor a metallic sphere higher po lower potential potential
we also find that the force reverses when i either direction of current is reversed or ii the direction of the magnetic field is reversed . in such a condition we can use a simple rule to find the direction of the force on the conductor . this rule is called fleming s left hand rule .
to these metal caps . the metal caps are for connecting the fuse in the circuit in a suitably made bracket . in a circuit diagram . the electric fuse is represented by the symbol shown in figure b . we will now solve some problems based on electric fuse .
in an ocean . the difference in temperature between the surface water and the water at a depth of km is about c . this temperature difference is used to operate an ocean thermal energy conversion otec plant . liquid ammonia or cfc heated by warm sea water evaporates and expands to turn a turbine . the vapours are condensed back to liquid by cold sea water . and reused .
nature of image virtual . erect and extremely diminished virtual . erect and diminished
as our demand for energy increases . we need to look for more and more sources of energy . we could develop the technology to use the available conventional sources more efficiently and also look for new sources of energy . any new source of energy we seek to exploit would need specific devices developed with that source in mind . let us now look at some of the latest sources of energy that we seek to tap . and the technology designed to capture and store energy from that source .
locations chosen a gujrat gulf of kutch lamba . b west bengal sundervans .
 . . plotting of a magnetic field of a magnet to trace the magnetic field lines . place the bar magnet ns on a sheet of paper and mark its boundary . mark point a near the north pole of the given magnet . place the compass needle figure . so that one of its ends south lies exactly over point a as in fig . . mark point b on the paper at the opposite north end of the compass needle . move the compass needle so that the south end of the compass needle lies over b and mark point c at the north end of the needle and so on . go on doing so till a point is reached near the south pole of the given magnet . join all these points with a free hand curve so as to form a smooth dotted curve .
an important advantage of using wind energy for generating electricity is that its use mystudygear does not cause any pollution . another advantage is that wind energy is a renewable source do of energy which will never get exhausted . as long as the sun keeps shining . the wind will keep blowing and provide us energy . the increased use of wind energy for generating electricity will help us conserve fossil fuels like coal . petroleum and natural gas so that they may last longer . moreover . wind energy is available free of cost at 
material through which current flows . since . resistance of nichrome is high . so a large amount of heat is produced in the element of the electric heater . thus . filament of electric heater becomes red hot . on the other hand . connecting wires are made of copper or aluminium . since electric resistivity and hence resistance of copper or aluminium is very small . so a very small heat is produced in the connecting wires made of copper or aluminium .
activity let us find the focal length of a concave mirror . face the concave mirror towards the sun . take a small piece of paper and fix it to a thin stick . using the stick as a handle . hold the paper very close to the mirror . now gradually take the paper away from the mirror . towards the sun . at all times hold the paper at a small angle to the mirror to allow sunlight to fall on the mirror . after a certain distance you will see an oval spot on the paper . adjust the position and the angle of the paper till you get a very small . almost round . bright spot . at this position measure the distance between the pole of the mirror and the paper . this distance is the approximate focal length of the mirror . if you keep the paper there for some time . the paper will start burning because sunlight gets concentrated at one spot . producing a lot of heat .
lens screen screen back and forth till you see a sharp image of the flame on the screen . repeat this by placing the candle at different positions . in each case note the size of the image . also . note whether the image is erect or inverted . try to verify all the entries of table . . in which cases are images not formed on the screen f f f fig . . 
the same plane . the plane of paper . they are neither coming up out of the paper nor going down into the paper .
the current in the coil is called an induced current . because the current is brought about or induced by a changing magnetic field . since a source of brought about or induced hy a cha potential difference is always needed to produce a current . the coil itself behaves as if it were a source of potential difference . this potential difference is known as an induced potential difference . thus . a changing magnetic field induces a potential difference in the coil . and the potential difference leads to an induced current .
magnetic field lines due to a current in a circular loop consider a loop of wire that forms a nearly complete circle . it is fixed vertically in a piece of cardboard . with half the loop above the cardboard and half below it figure . a . join the free ends of the wire to a battery through a switch . and pass a current through it . the wire passes through the cardboard at two points . using the procedure discussed before . draw the magnetic field lines around the two points above the cardboard . the lines will be nearly concentric circles centered on the point through which the wire passes . the lines near the centre of the loop are nearly straight . in fact . the magnetic field at the centre of the loop is perpendicular to the plane of the loop . i . e . . it is along the axis of the loop . figure . b shows the pattern with the help of iron filings .
eye at both positions sees the reflected light . incident light a this eye does not see the light . incident light this eye sees the light . b fig . schematic representation of a diffuse reflection . where the reflected rays travel in random directions and b specular reflection . where the reflected rays are all parallel to each other .
similar results are obtained when two coils are wound over the same core and a current is passed through one of them as shown in figure . .
figure . shows a rectangular glass slab pqrs . a light ray ao falls on the surface pq . nom is the normal at point of incidence o to the surface pq . at the surface pq the ray ao enters from air to glass . so it bends towards the normal nom and travels undeviated inside the glass in a straight path along ob . at the surface rs . the ray ob suffers refraction . nįbm is the normal at the point of incidence b to the surface rs . the ray ob now enters from glass to air so it bends away from the normal n . bm . and travels along bc .
relation between radius of curvature and focal length of a spherical mirror for a spherical mirror having small aperture . the principal focus f lies exactly mid way between the pole p and centre of curvature c see figures and . so . the focal length of a spherical mirror a concave mirror or a convex mirror is equal to half of its radius of curvature . if f is the focal length of a spherical mirror and r is its radius of curvature . then ef hl let us solve one problem now .
it is also possible that the same person has both the defects of vision myopia as well as hypermetropia . a person suffering from myopia as well as hypermetropia uses spectacles having bifocal lenses in which upper part consists of a concave lens to correct myopia used for distant vision and the lower part consists of a convex lens to correct hypermetropia used for reading purposes see figure . these days it is possible to correct the refractive defects of the eye such as myopia and hypermetropia by using contact
principal focus the point at which a narrow beam of light moving parallel to its principal axis . meets or appears to meet after reflection from the mirror . is called the principal focus of the mirror . it is represented by f .
the near point of an eye having hypermetropia or long sightedness is at point n which is more than centrimetres away see figure b . the diverging rays of light coming from a hypermetropic person s near point can just be focused by his eye on the retina as shown in figure b . this means that if the object placed at the normal near point n cm can be made to appear as if it were placed at this eye s near point n . then the eye will be able to see it clearly . this can be done by putting a convex lens in front of the eye .
limitations of solar energy a it cannot be used at night . b devices based on solar energy do not work well on cloudy days .
 . . colour of sky during sunrise and sunset when the air is clear . then during sunset sunrise the sun and the sky around it will appear yellow because the light from the sun has passed a long distance through air and some of the blue light has been scattered away . if the air is polluted with small particles . natural or otherwise . the sunset will be redder . sunsets over the sea may also be orange due to salt particles in the air . which are effective tyndall scatterers . the sky around the sun is seen reddened as well as the light coming directly from the sun . this is because all light is scattered relatively well through small angles but blue light is then more likely to be scattered twice or more over the greater distances leaving the yellow . red and orange colours fig . .
in diffuse reflection . a parallel beam of incident light is reflected in different directions . in this case . the parallel incident rays do not remain parallel after reflection . they are scattered in different directions see figure . the diffuse reflection is also known as irregular reflection or scattering . the diffuse reflection of light takes place from rough surfaces like that of paper . cardboard . chalk . table . chair . walls and unpolished metal objects . for example . when a parallel beam of light rays falls on the rough surface of a sheet of paper . the light is scattered by making reflected rays in different directions see figure . thus . a sheet of paper produces diffuse reflection of light . no image is formed in diffuse reflection of light . for example . a rough surface like that of paper does not produce an image of the object due to diffuse reflection of light . actually . the light rays falling on the rough surface of paper are scattered in all directions and hence no image is formed .
all the conductors like metals have some electrons which are loosely held by the nuclei of their atoms . these electrons are called free electrons and can move from one atom to another atom throughout the conductor . the presence of free electrons in a substance makes it a conductor of electricity . the electrons present in insulators are strongly held by the nuclei of their atoms . since there are no free electrons in an insulator which can move from one atom to another . an insulator does not allow electric charges or electricity to flow through it .
how long will an energy source last us we cannot depend on the fossil fuels for much longer . such sources that will get depleted some day are said to be exhaustible sources or non renewable sources of energy . renewable energy is available in our natural environment . in the form of some continuing or repetitive currents of energy . or is stored in such large underground reservoirs that the rate of depletion of the reservoir because of extraction of usable energy is practically negligible .
convex lens concave lens fig . if a ray is incident towards the optical centre . it passes undeviated through the lens .
combinations of resistors resistors in series in this combination . the resistances are joined end to end . thus the second end of each resistance is joined to the first end of the next resistance and so on . the first end of the first resistance and the second end of the last resistance are connected to the cell . in this combination . the same current flows in all the resistors but the potential differences between their ends are different according to their
suppose the speed of light in medium is vi and that in medium is v . now i for the light going from medium to medium figure . the refractive index is given by . . . . . ii and for the light going from medium to medium figure . the refractive index is given by 
by a concave mirror at its focus see figure . this can be done by performing a simple experiment as follows . we take a concave mirror and point it towards the sun . hold a piece of paper in front of the concave mirror in such a way that the sunlight reflected by concave mirror falls on the paper see figure . a small patch of bright reflected light will appear on the paper . adjust the distance of paper from the concave mirror in such a way that the sharpest point of bright light is obtained . this sharp point of light on paper is the image of sun formed by the concave mirror see figure . this image of the sun is formed at the focus of concave mirror where the paper is held by us . if we keep this piece of paper in this position for a few minutes . the paper would start burning at the point of sun s image and a hole will be formed in it . this is because the concave mirror converges
the important advantages of a solar cooker for cooking food are the following i the use of solar cooker for cooking food saves precious fuels like coal . kerosene and lpg . ii the use of solar cooker does not produce smoke due to which it does not pollute air . iii when food is cooked in solar cooker . its nutrients do not get destroyed . this is because in a solar cooker . food is cooked at a comparatively lower temperature . iv in a solar cooker . up to four food items can be cooked at the same time .
temperature of c to c . when kept in sun for hours . you can measure the temperature using a thermometer . to get a temperature up to c . you can replace plastic sheet by glass sheet .
if the magnet is moved away from the coil . the current flows in a direction opposite to that in the case b and the galvanometer shows deflection towards left as shown in figure d .
involved in both are the same . the fact that a current carrying conductor experiences a force in a magnetic field is used in the electric motor . and . the fact that a changing magnetic field induces a current in a conductor is used in an electric generator . in an electric motor . electrical energy is converted into mechanical kinetic energy . on the other hand . a generator converts kinetic energy into electrical energy .
devices in series and parallel you must have seen tiny bulbs strung together for decorating buildings during festivals like diwali . and occasions like marriages . etc . these bulbs are connected in series . and the mains voltage is applied to the combination . the potential difference v of the mains gets divided across the bulbs v v v v . . . . so . a small potential difference exists across each bulb . close to that required to make the bulb work . however . the same current flows through all the bulbs . so . if one bulb goes bad . the current through it stops . and this stops the current through the rest of the bulbs as well . to make the chain of lights work . you have to find and replace the defective bulb . this problem does not occur with the lights in your house . that is because in houses . lights . fans . etc . . are connected in parallel . in parallel connection . the same mains voltage gets applied to each device . but the current through each is different . if one of them goes bad . the current in the other branches of the parallel connection does not stop . another advantage of parallel connection is that . unlike series connection . each device can draw a different current . as per its requirement .
 . combined resistance of two resistances connected in parallel
 an object cm high is placed at a distance of cm in front of a concave mirror of focal length cm . find the position . nature and size of the image formed . ans . here . size of object . h cm u cm sign convention 
table . images formed by convex mirrors object position image position nature of image between infinity and the pole between the focus virtual . smaller and the pole and erect a f at infinity at the focus f . virtual . point sized
potential the potential difference between two points a and b is the work done per unit charge in taking a charge from b to a . v va vb w q . the potential at a point is the work done per unit charge in taking a charge to that point from a chosen reference point . quite often . the potential at infinity is chosen as zero . the si unit of potential and potential difference is the volt v .
in honour of the french physicist andré marie ampère . who made many contributions that helped our understanding of electricity .
semiconductors metals like copper . silver . iron . etc . . are conductors of electricity as they contain a large number of free electrons . rubber . glass . wood . etc . . are insulators as they have almost no free electrons . in between the two . there are materials such as silicon and germanium in which the number of free electrons is much greater than that in insulators and much smaller than that in conductors . such materials are called semiconductors . their resistivity decreases as the temperature increases . also the resistivity can be drastically changed by putting some impurity in the semiconductor . by controlling the amount of impurity and its distribution . very useful electronic devices are formed from semiconductors . such semiconductor devices are used in computers . digital watches . electronic calculators . etc .
rules for obtaining images formed by concave mirrors when an object is placed in front of a concave mirror . an image is formed . the image is formed at that point where at least two reflected rays intersect or appear to intersect . now . to find out the position of an image formed by a concave mirror . we will use only those two rays of light starting from the object whose paths . after reflection from the mirror . are known to us and easy to draw . the following rays of light are usually used to locate the images formed by concave mirrors . we can call them rules for obtaining images in concave mirrors .
 iv distances measured perpendicular to the principal axis and in the upward direction are taken as positive and those measured perpendicular and below the principal axis are taken as negative .
a great advantage of the ocean thermal energy is that it can be used continuously hours a day throughout the year . another advantage is that ocean thermal energy is a renewable source of energy and its use does not cause any pollution . please note that wave energy and ocean thermal energy are the two forms in which solar energy manifests itself in oceans . another point to be noted is that though the energy potential from the sea tidal energy . wave energy and ocean thermal energy is very large but its large scale exploitation is difficult at the moment .
do huua full size of an object is seen even if half of the portion of the lens is covered or painted black . however . intensity decreases . know
we also find that the direction of deflection of the compass needle reverses on reversing the current in the conductor . thus . we find that when current is passed through a straight conductor . magnitude of magnetic field around a straight wire carrying current is i directly proportional to the strength of current passed through the wire i . e . . b o i . ii inversely proportional to the distance of the point of observation from the straight current carrying wire i . e . . bac . .
 do you know the leading users of hydroelectric power include usa . china . brazil . canada . followed by norway and russia .
activity corner to understand the concept of electric resistance . apparatus four dry cells of . v each . an ammeter a range . a plug key . thick connecting wires . nichrome wire . a torch bulb . a w bulb .
from it . now . by saying that the object is at infinity . we mean that the object is at a distance which is many . many times its focal length it may be cm . . cm or even more . and by saying that the image is formed at the focus of this concave mirror . we mean that the image is formed at a distance of cm from the pole of this concave mirror .
a convex lens has a positive power and a concave lens has a negative power . power is measured in dioptre .
which the retina is at a larger distance from the eye lens . this condition also results in the formation of the image of a distant object in front of the retina even though the eye lens may have correct converging power . figure a shows an eye having the defect called myopia or short sightedness . in this case . the parallel rays of light coming from the distant object o at infinity are converged to form an image i in front of the retina due to which the eye cannot see the distant object clearly see figure a the object is at a large distance called infinity from the eye . so it has not been shown in this figure . the image is formed in
do you know the attraction and repulsion of electric charges can be used in experiments to demonstrate the existence of two types of charge . note that it is possible for a charged object to attract an uncharged object that is free to moves but it cannot repel an uncharged object because it is neutral .
 iii after half rotation . when the coil goes beyond vertical position . the side cd of the coil comes on the left side whereas side ab of the coil comes to the right side . and the two commutator half rings automatically change contact from one brush to the other . so . after half rotation of the coil . the commutator half ring y makes contact with brush p whereas the commutator half ring x makes contact with brush q see figure . this reverses the direction of current in the coil . the reversal of direction of current reverses the direction of forces acting on the sides ab and cd of the coil . the side cd of the coil is now on the left side with a
observations ssssssssssss when the coil a is connected or when the coil a is disconnected . the galvanometer in coil b shows the deflection . as soon as the current in coil a reaches a steady value or zero . the galvanometer in coil b shows no deflection . coil a which causes induction of electric current is called primary coil . coil b in which current is induced is known as secondary coil .
nuclear binding energy mass defect the difference in mass of a nucleus and its constituent nucleons is called the mass defect of that nucleus . mass defect . am zmp a z mn m . where m is the mass of a given nucleus .
electric current the rate of flow of charges through a conductor is called the electric current . it is measured as the amount of electric charge passing through any cross section of conductor in unit time . i if electric current through a conductor is steady . then it is measured as i ne where is the electric charge and n is the number of free electrons passing through a cross section of a conductor in time t . ii if electric current through a conductor is not steady . then it is measured . i .
energy sources can be classified as renewable and non renewable .
laws of refraction the way a ray of light refracts when it is incident on the surface separating two media depends not only on the refractive indices of the media but also on the angle of incidence . let ab represent a plane surface separating two transparent media medium and medium . let their refractive indices be n . and n . respectively . the two media can medium be any pair such as air and water . or air and glass . suppose a ray of light po travelling in medium is incident on the surface ab at a point o . draw a normal n . on . to the surface at o . on . is in medium and on . is in medium . the angle i medium between the incident ray po and the normal on . is called the angle of incidence . the angle r between the refracted ray oq in . lo and the normal on . is called the angle of refraction . two laws of refraction govern the refraction that takes place at a surface fig . . of separation such as ab . . do brands ooo
stolis table . images formed by a convex lens position of the nature and size position of the object at infinity at f . real . point sized between infinity and f between f . and f . real . smaller . inverted f a f . a f c b at f at at at f real . same sized . inverted f between f . and f between f . and infinity real . enlarged . inverted zo x f f a f at f . at infinity real . infinitely large . inverted f f between f and on the side of the object virtual . larger . erect u ūk f . f a one can also say that the image is formed on the side of the object . and is virtual and erect . in fact . this is more practical from the observer s point of view .
in view of these developments . one must regard light as having dual nature . that is . in some cases light acts like a wave and in the others it acts like a particle . classical electromagnetic wave theory provides an adequate explanation of light propagation and effects of interference whereas the photoelectric effect involving the interaction of light with matter is best explained by assuming that light is a particle . thus . we can say that light propagates as a wave and is emitted and absorbed as a particle .
disadvantages demerits a the energy stored in batteries . provide only direct current d . c . . for devices which require alternating current a . c . . d . c . is converted into a . c . conversion reduces efficiency and increases its cost . b they are very expensive because of use of expensive components like special grade silicon which is limited in nature . c the efficiency of energy conversion is low as compared to other methods of generating electricity .
how the eye adjusts for objects at different distances accommodation for clear vision . sharp images of objects have to form on the retina . since the distance of the retina from the eye lens is fixed . the image distance v is fixed . however . we need to see objects that are at different distances from the eye . if you are looking at a cloud . the object distance is large . if you are looking at your finger . the object distance is small . to form clear and sharp images of both at the same distance from the lens . the focal length of the eye lens has to change . as you know . the ciliary muscles can change the focal length of the eye lens . when we are looking at a distant object usually farther than m . the ciliary muscles are in their most relaxed state . then the focal length of the eye lens is such that rays coming from the distant object are focused on the retina . and we see the object clearly figure . a . when we are looking at a nearby object . the ciliary muscles contract to increase the curvature of the crystalline lens . the thickness of this lens increases . which decreases its focal length and therefore . the focal length of the eye lens . the ciliary muscles adjust the focal length in such a manner that a sharp image is formed on the retina figure . b . this process of adjustment of the focal length of the eye lens is called accommodation . accommodation is the process by which the eye changes the focal length of the eye lens such that a sharp image is always formed on the retina .
if the direction of current in a conductor and the direction of magnetic field in which it is placed . are known . then the direction of force acting on the current carrying conductor can be found out by using fleming s left hand rule . this is described below .
 join the other end of the key to the positive terminal of the cell . the electric circuit is ready as shown in figure . close the key . observation you will observe that the bulb glows due to the flow of current in it . conclusion the path along which the current flows is called a circuit . the circuit in which electric current flows is called a closed circuit . the bulb in this activity glows because the circuit is complete . it is said to be a closed circuit . the circuit in which electrical contact at any point is broken and no current flows is called an open circuit . when the key in this activity is opened . the bulb does not glow . because the circuit is incomplete . it is said to be an open circuit .
b at c at c real . same size . inverted aic
 ii ray the straight line path along which the light travels . in a homogeneous medium . is called a ray . it is represented by an arrow head on a straight line the arrow head gives the direction of propagation of light . fig . 
cause of refraction the speed of light is different in different media or substances . for example . the speed of light in air is x m s whereas that in glass is m s . it is clear from these values that the speed of light is more in air but less in glass . in other words . light travels faster in air but slower in glass . the refraction of light is due to the change in the speed of light on going from one medium to another . thus . when light goes from one medium to another . its speed changes . and this change in speed of light causes the refraction of light . the refraction of light on going from air to glass takes place because the speed of light is different in air and glass being more in air and lesser in glass . so . when light enters from air into glass . its speed changes it gets reduced . and this change in speed of light in going from air to glass causes the refraction of light or bending of light . please note that greater the difference in the speeds of light in the two media . greater will be the amount of refraction or bending of light .
as seen from the table silver has minimum resistivity . therefore . silver is the best conductor of electricity . silver is not used because it is costly .
those substances through which electric charges cannot flow . are called insulators . in other words those substances through which electricity cannot flow are called insulators . glass . ebonite . rubber . most plastics . paper . dry wood . cotton . mica . bakelite . porcelain . and dry air . are all insulators because they do not allow electric charges or electricity to flow through them see figure . in the case of charged insulators like glass . ebonite . etc . . the electric charges remain bound to them . and do not move away .
 . . nuclear fusion when two or more than two light nuclei fuse to form a heavy nucleus . with the liberation of energy . the process is called nuclear fusion . hence . nuclear fusion process is just the reverse of nuclear fission process . fusion takes place when light atoms are heated to an extremely high temperature . there is some loss of mass during the fusion process . which gets converted to energy
apparent position of the sun observer horizon atmosphere fig . apparent position of sun during sunrise and sunset .
for a concave mirror we shall now locate the image of a point object a placed before a concave mirror figure . . first draw a ray ad parallel to the principal axis . after reflection . this ray will pass through the focus . f . then draw a ray ae through the centre of curvature . c . since it is incident normal to the mirror at e . it will retrace its path along ec . the reflected rays actually intersect at a . where the real image of a is formed .
 . . advantages of solar cooker like other solar applications . solar cooker has the following advantages . one of the most important advantages of a solar cooker is that it can be used for cooking food free of cost for many years . . it saves fuel . a non renewable source . . solar cooker does not produce smoke or other residue due to which the environment does not get polluted . . when food is cooked in solar cooker all the nutrients are retained and do not get destroyed as it cooks food at a very low temperature .
a floating gas holder biogas plant is costlier than a fixed dome type biogas plant .
geothermal energy definition energy harnessed from the heat of the earth . is called geothermal energy this energy does not come directly or indirectly from solar energy . explanation we know that the deeper regions of the earth s crust are very hot . the heat melts the rocks . the molten rocks called magma formed in deeper hot regions of earth s core get pushed upward and trapped in certain regions called hot spots due to geological changes . the magma gets collected at some depth below the earth s surface . these places . called hot spots . become source of geothermal energy . procurement underground water in contact with the hot spots turns into steam which gets compressed to very high pressure . thus steam is extracted by linking pipes through holes drilled upto hot spots . the outcoming steam rotates the turbine of an electric generator and produces electrical energy . locations in india there are only few places where geothermal energy can be exploited on commercial lines . one such place is located in madhya pradesh .
you might have experienced that you are unable to see clearly for sometime when you enter from bright sunlight into a room with dim light . after sometime . however . you may be able to see things in the dim lit room . the pupil of an eye acts like a variable aperture whose size can be varied with the help of the iris . when light is very bright . the iris contracts the pupil to allow less light to enter the eye . however . in dim light the iris expands the pupil to allow more light to enter the eye . thus . the pupil opens completely through the relaxation of the iris .
 . when the object lies between f and optical centre consider two rays one moving parallel to the principal axis and the other passing through the optical centre . after refraction the two rays seem to meet on the same side as that of the object . thus . the image lies on the same side as that of the object fig . . when the object lies between the focus f . and the optical centre . then . the image is formed on the same side as that of object . . the image is virtual . erect and magnified . . it is used in magnifying glass and as eye lenses in spectacles for long sightedness .
finding the image by ray tracing numerous rays of light starting from a point object placed before a spherical mirror fall on the mirror and get reflected . the image of the object is formed at the point of intersection of the reflected rays . ray tracing means locating the image geometrically . this is done by drawing some of the rays and finding the point of intersection of the reflected rays .
advantages of solar cells a solar cells are suitable for use in remote areas where electrical power lines have not reached . b solar cells require little maintenance and last for a long time . c after installation . no further cost is involved in generating electricity directly from solar cells . d solar cells are environment friendly . as they do not cause any pollution . limitations of generating electricity from solar cells a solar panels are expensive . although silicon is the second most abundant element on earth . the cost of purifying silicon for making semiconductors used in solar cells is very high . this
aperture the circular area that determines the amount of light falling on a mirror or a lens is its aperture . in case of a spherical mirror . the area of the circle made by its boundary is its aperture . sometimes . the aperture of a spherical mirror is expressed in terms of the diameter of its boundary . thus . a mirror of сm aperture would mean that the diameter of its boundary is cm . focus and focal length in figure . c . a ray ab . parallel to the principal axis . is incident on a concave mirror . after reflection . the ray cuts the principal axis at a point f . in fact . if the aperture of the mirror is small . all rays incident parallel to the principal axis will cut the principal axis at this same point f after reflection . in other words . such incident rays converge to f . a concave mirror is therefore also called a converging mirror . in figure . d . a ray ab . parallel to the principal axis . is incident on a convex mirror . the ray is reflected along bd . when bd is produced backwards . it intersects the principal axis at f . for a convex mirror of small aperture . all rays incident parallel to the principal axis . when produced backwards after reflection . appear to diverge from this same point f . a convex mirror is therefore also called a diverging mirror . we can now define focus and focal length of a spherical mirror as follows . the point on the principal axis where rays incident parallel to the principal axis converge to or appear to diverge from after reflection is called the focus of the spherical mirror . the distance of the focus from the pole is called the focal length of the spherical mirror . an incident ray passing or appearing to pass through the focus becomes parallel to the principal axis after reflection . you can see this by reversing the direction of the arrows in figure . .
 . image formation by concave and convex lens . . image formed by a concave lens a when object lies at infinity consider two parallel rays incident on a concave lens . after refraction these rays diverge . on producing the rays backwards these rays seem to come from the first focus of the lens . thus . the image is formed at the first focus fig . . when the object is placed at infinity . then . the image is formed at the focus on the same side as that of the object . . the image is diminished to a point . is virtual and erect .
convex mirrors . it is used as a rear view mirror in automobiles . this is due to the reason that a convex mirror provides a wider field of view than a plane or concave mirror . it produces an erect . diminished and virtual image . usually on the rear view mirror it is written objects in this mirror are closer than they appear fig . . it is because a convex mirror does not give the exact distance of the vehicle coming from behind as it produces a diminished image .
 . when the object lies beyond the centre of curvature c consider a ray starting from the top of the object and parallel to the principal axis . this ray after reflection from the mirror passes through the focus . another ray of light starting from the top of the object and passing through the focus becomes parallel to the principal axis after reflection from the mirror . these two reflected rays meet between the centre of curvature and the focus to form the real image of the object fig . . this image is real . inverted and diminished .
if we hold a matchstick as object in front of a convex mirror . a virtual . erect and diminished smaller image of the matchstick is seen on looking into the convex mirror see figure a . we know that the back side of a shining steel spoon which is bulging outwards is a kind of convex mirror . so . if we keep our face in front of the back side of a shining steel spoon we will see a virtual and erect image of the face which is smaller in size as compared to the face see figure b .
floating gas holder type biogas plant the floating gas holder type biogas plant is quite similar to the fixed dome type . only difference is that it has a mobile dome made up of steel which floats over the slurry in the digester . as more and more gas is produced . the steel gas holder rises up . increasing the pressure inside the gas holder . this pushes the spent slurry towards overflow through outlet chamber
 . directive property when a magnet is suspended freely . it always orients itself in the north south direction . if the bar magnet is free to rotate . one end points north . this end is called the north pole or n pole the other end is the south pole or s pole . the north pole of a magnet is usually coloured red or a red dot is placed on its side . actually . the north and south poles of a magnet point towards the south and north magnetic poles of the earth and not towards the earth s geographic poles .
field is from west to east . so we point our forefinger from west to east direction to represent the magnetic field figure a . now . the current is flowing vertically downwards . so we point our centre finger vertically downwards to represent the direction of current . now . let us look at the direction of our thumb . the thumb points in the forward direction towards south . this gives us the direction of force acting on the wire or direction of motion of wire . so . the force acting on the current carrying wire will be in the south direction as shown by the arrow ad in figure b . and the wire will move in the south direction .
repulsion is sure test of magnetism if we want to test whether a metal bar is magnet or not . then bring a magnet near the ends of the metal bar . if one end of the bar is attracted by the magnet and other end is repelled . then metal bar is a magnet . but if both ends of the metal bar are attracted by the same pole of magnet . then the metal bar is not a magnet but is a magnetic material . therefore . repulsion is the sure test of magnetism .
found that if a soft iron rod called core is placed inside a solenoid . then the strength of magnetic field becomes very large because the iron core gets magnetised by induction . this combination of a solenoid and a soft iron core is called an electromagnet . thus . an electromagnet is a magnet consisting of a long coil of insulated copper wire wrapped around a soft iron core that is magnetised only when electric current is passed through the coil . a simple electromagnet is shown in figure . to make an electromagnet all that we have to do is to take a rod ns of soft iron and wind a coil c of insulated copper wire round it . when the two ends of the copper coil are connected to a battery . an electromagnet is formed see figure .
fig . illustrates these facts . figure . a shows that when light travels from air optically rarer into glass optically denser it bends towards the normal . figure . b shows that when light travels from glass optically denser into air optically rarer it bends away from the normal .
 . electric generators or dynamo an electric generator also called dynamo is a machine which generates electricity by using the principle of electromagnetic induction . it converts mechanical energy into electrical energy . there are two kinds of generators i alternating current generators or ac generators . ii direct current generators or de generators .
generator . the armature of the generator rotates within two poles of a strong magnet . the rotation of the armature of the generator between two poles of a strong magnet gives rise to electric current or electricity . this electricity is transmitted to the sub stations through a transformer for further distribution to the houses and factories .
in william gilbert extended these experiments to a variety of materials . using the fact that a compass needle orients in preferred directions . he suggested that the earth itself is a large permanent magnet . before the relation of magnetic interactions to moving charges was understood . the interaction of permanent magnets and compass needles were described in terms of magnetic poles . if a bar shaped permanent magnet . or a bar magnet . is free to rotate . one end points north . this end is called the north pole or n pole the other end is the south pole or s pole . either pole of a permanent magnet attracts an object that contains iron but is not itself magnetised . these days . magnets have a variety of applications . they are used in radio and stereo speakers . as magnetic catchers in almirahs and refrigerators to shut them . in video and audio cassette tapes . on the hard discs and floppies of computers . magnets are also used in medical science in magnetic resonance imaging mri scanners .
 b the direction of the force depends on the direction of the magnetic field and is perpendicular to it . c the direction of the force depends on the direction of the current and is perpendicular to it .
we are now in a position to define the focal length of a lens . the focal length of a lens is the distance between optical centre and principal focus of the lens . in figure . the distance cf is the focal length of the convex lens . it should be noted that the distance cf is also equal to the focal length of the lens . the focal length of a lens is denoted by the letter f . the focal length of a lens depends on the refractive index of the glass from which it is made . and the curvature of its two surfaces . higher the refractive index . shorter will be the focal length . similarly . more the curvature . shorter is the focal length .
images formed by lenses consider a point object placed in front of a thin lens of small aperture . light starting from the object travels in all directions . those rays of light that fall on the lens are transmitted through the lens . the transmitted rays may actually intersect at a point . or they may intersect when produced backwards . their point of intersection is the image of the object . if the rays actually intersect . the image formed is real . and if the rays intersect when produced backwards . the image formed is virtual . the image of an extended object can be found by locating the image of each point on it . we can locate the image formed by a lens of a point object by tracing the paths of any two rays and finding their point of intersection . all transmitted rays will either pass through or seem to pass through this point of intersection . for convenience . we choose two rays whose paths are known . first . we choose the ray that is incident parallel to the principal axis . in case of a convex lens . the transmitted ray will pass through the focus . and in case of a concave lens . the transmitted ray s backward projection will pass through the focus . then . we choose the ray that passes through the optical centre of the lens . this ray is transmitted without any deviation . the point of intersection of these two transmitted rays is the image of the point object . while tracing the rays . we do not show the ray bending at each surface of the lens . instead . we show the incident rays getting bent at the central . vertical line of the lens .
to the principal axis . this ray after reflection from the mirror passes through the focus . another ray of light starting from the top of the object and passing through the focus becomes parallel to the principal axis after reflection from the mirror . these two reflected rays meet at a point lying beyond the centre of curvature to form the real image of the object fig . . this image is real . inverted and bigger than the object .
 laws of refraction . the incident ray . the refracted ray and the normal to the refracting surface at the point of incidence are in the same plane . . the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction satisfy the equation sin i na sin r ne . . . . the second law given above is also called snell s law . in the situation shown in figure . . if the first medium is air then ni . let the refractive index of the second medium be denoted by n . equation . can then be written as sin i n . . . . sin r the ratio ng n . is also called the refractive index of medium with respect to medium and is denoted by the symbol n . if v . and v are the speeds of light in medium and medium respectively . na c n c v or . similarly . . thus . . 
use of liquefied petroleum gas lpg lpg is considered as a good fuel . the reasons are i it has a high calorific value which is kj g . ii it is very neat and clean domestic fuel . iii it burns with a smokeless flame and hence does not cause pollution . iv it does not produce any poisonous gases on combustion . v it is easy to handle and convenient to store .
in case of a concave lens when the object is moved towards the lens the image also moves towards the optical centre . and its size increases gradually .
non conventional sources of energy the sources which are not used extensively i . e . . are limited in use are called non conventional sources of energy . for example solar energy . sea energy . geothermal energy and nuclear energy . these are called as alternative sources of energy .
some of the limitations of harnessing wind energy for generating electricity are as follows i wind energy farms cannot be established everywhere . the wind energy farms can be established only at those places where wind blows for most part of the year .
 . . limitations of solar energy the following are the limitations of solar energy . the solar energy received by the earth is in scattered or diffused form . . the energy radiated by the sun on a bright sunny day is approximately . kw m . but only per cent of this solar energy reaches the earth . . solar energy is not available at a constant rate due to clouds . wind . haze etc . . solar energy is not available at night uniformly . . solar energy may not be available at all places on the earth .
limitations of ohm s law although ohm s law has been found valid over a large class of materials . there do exists materials and devices used in electric circuits where the proportionality of v and i does not hold . the deviations broadly are one or more of the following types 
it should be noted that in many respects an electromagnet is better than a permanent magnet because it can produce very strong magnetic fields and its strength can be controlled by varying the number of turns in its coil or by changing the current flowing through the coil .
it should be noted that all the appliances which run on electricity do not convert all the electric energy into heat energy . only the electrical heating appliances convert most of the electric energy into heat energy . for example . when electric current is passed through an electric appliance such as a fan . then most of the electric energy is used up in running the fan or turning the fan . only a very small amount of electric energy is converted into heat energy by a fan . due to this . an electric fan becomes slightly warm when run continuously for a long time . on the other hand . when electric current is passed through an en electric current is passed through an electrical heating appliance such as an electric heater . electric kettle . hair dryer . immersion rod or a geyser . then most of the electrical energy
uses of concave lenses i concave lenses are used in spectacles to correct the defect of vision called myopia or short sightedness . ii concave lens is used as eye lens in galilean telescope . iii concave lenses are used in combination with convex lenses to make high quality lens systems for optical instruments . iv concave lens is used in wide angle spyhole in doors . before we go further and discuss the mirror formula and magnification formulae for a concave lens . please answer the following questions 
 . optical centre the central point in the lens is called the optical centre . if a ray is incident towards the optical centre . it passes undeviated through the lens fig . a and . .
normal a perpendicular drawn on the reflecting surface at the point of incidence . is called the normal . no is the normal .
according to fleming s left hand rule hold the forefinger . the centre finger and the thumb of your left hand at right angles to one another . adjust your hand in such a way that the forefinger points in the direction of magnetic field and the centre finger points in the direction of current . then the direction in which thumb points . gives the direction of force acting on the conductor . since the conductor say . a wire moves along the direction in which the force acts on it . we can also say that the direction in which the thumb points gives the direction of motion of the conductor . to memorize fleming s left hand rule we should remember that the forefinger represents the magnetic field both forefinger and field . start with the same letter f . the centre finger represents current both centre and current start with letter c . and the thumb represents force or motion both thumb and motion contain the letter m . we will make the fleming s left hand rule more clear by taking an example .
when the object is at a considerable distance . we say that the object is at infinity . suppose an object ab in the form of an arrow pointing upwards is at a considerable distance from a convex lens . since the object is very far off from the lens . it has not been shown in figure . now . when the object is at infinity . then all the rays from a given point of the object . which are diverging in the beginning . become parallel to one another when they reach the lens after travelling a long distance . so . in figure . we have two rays
activity cut small rectangular strips from a can to make the blades of a turbine . make cuts on the edge of a round plastic lid cover and fix the blades in them with glue . as shown . fix a small length of tube from the refill of a pen at the centre of the lid . slide its free end over the shaft of a motor from a toy . if you blow on the blades of your turbine . it will rotate . and so will the shaft of the motor . the turbine will also rotate when steam from a kettle or a jet of water falls on its blades . since dc motors and generators are similar in construction . your motor acts as a generator when its shaft is rotated . you will detect a current by connecting its wires to a sensitive galvanoscope or milliammeter . with a powerful motor . you may be able to light an led .
 ii a convex mirror is that spherical mirror in which the reflection of light takes place at the convex
slurry of cattle dung and water outlet for biogas . grants slab cover s mixing tank dome va gas valve slab cover met biogas overflow at tank ba ground level inlet chamber hd tocross seseossd betaka pada atang davao hhhhihhhhhhe spent slurry on hehhhhhhh der best ssd aceasta eco es s dung and water mixture ar serie httahhhhhhh . wtores oran en outlet chamber sssss pare underground digester tank fixed dome type biogas plant . fig . a labelled diagram of a fixed dome type biogas plant .
the human eye has the following parts i cornea the transparent spherical membrane covering the front of the eye . ii iris the coloured diaphragm between the cornea and lens . iii pupil the small hole in the iris . iv eye lens it is a transparent lens made of jelly like material . v ciliary muscles these muscles hold the lens in position . vi retina the back surface of the eye . vii blind spot the point at which the optic nerve leaves the eye . an image formed at this point is not sent to the brain . viii aqueous humour a clear liquid region between the cornea and the lens . ix vitreous humour the space between eye lens and retina is filled with another liquid called vitreous humour .
the radius of curvature of a spherical mirror is the radius of the hollow sphere of glass of which the mirror is a part . in figure a . the distance cp is the radius of curvature of the concave mirror and in figure b . the distance cp is the radius of curvature of the convex mirror . the
 exactly similar observations are made if the magnet is stationary and the coil is moved either towards or away from the magnet .
power d power d power d a convex lens b concave lens c combination of convex lens and concave lens figure . a combination of convex lens of power d and a concave lens of power . d kept in close contact has a resultant power of . d .
so . resistances or resistors in series the combined resistance or resultant resistance of a number of resistances or resistors connected in series is calculated by using the law of combination of resistances in series . according to the law of combination of resistances in series the combined resistance of any number of resistances connected in series is equal to the sum of the individual resistances . for example . if a number of resistances r . r . r . . . . . . etc . . are connected in series . then their combined resistance r is given by r r r r . . . . . . . . . suppose that a resistance r of ohms and another resistance r of ohms are connected in series and we want to find out their combined resistance r . we know that r r r r and . combined resistance . r ohms
induced potential difference is produced when there is relative motion . between a magnetic field and the conductor owoce ammeter cach
electromagnetic induction the phenomenon in which an electric current is induced in a circuit because of a changing magnetic field is called electromagnetic induction . for example . relative motion between a coil and a magnet induces a current in the coil whose direction is given by fleming s right hand rule if the forefinger . second finger and thumb of the right hand are stretched at right angles to each other . with the forefinger in the direction of the field and the thumb in the direction of the motion of the wire then the current in the wire is in the direction of the second finger . for both rules given by fleming . field corresponds to the forefinger . current to the second finger and movement or force to the thumb . 
competition window lens maker s formula the focal length f of a lens depends upon the refractive indices of the material of the lens and the medium in which the lens is present and the radii of curvature of both sides . the following relation giving focal length f is called as lens maker s formula .
absolute refractive index absolute refractive index of a medium is defined as the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum or air to the speed of light in the medium . it is denoted by n . then . n speed of light in air speed of light in medium v it has no unit . relative refractive index when light passes from medium to another medium . the refractive index of medium with respect to medium is written as n . and is called relative refractive index . speed of light in medium v speed of light in medium n 
therr ants burn fossil fuels to produce heat . urn fossil fuels to
rule . a ray of light which is parallel to the principal axis of a concave mirror . passes through its focus after reflection from the mirror . this is shown in figure . here . we have a concave mirror m and its principal axis is xp . the centre of m studygear curvature is c and its focus is f . now . a ray of light ab is parallel to the principal axis of the mirror . it strikes the mirror at point b and gets reflected . after reflection its path changes and it passes through the focus f and goes in the direction by see figure .
a separate connection is taken from the live wire of the ring for each appliance .
 iv the setting up of wind energy farms is very expensive . the wind power potential of our country is estimated to be about . mw . this means that if india s wind energy is fully harnessed . then . megawatt of electrical power can be generated . at present we are generating more than mw of electricity from wind energy . this is going to increase soon when some more wind energy farms start working . the largest wind energy farm established near kanyakumari in tamil nadu can generate mw electricity . india is ranked fifth in the world for harnessing wind energy for the production of electricity . the first position is occupied by germany . denmark is . however . called the country of winds because more than of the electricity needs of denmark are met by utilising wind energy .
concave a ray of light a passing through g figure . mirror focus f .
rule . a ray of light which is parallel to the principal axis of a concave lens . appears to be coming from its focus after refraction through the lens . this is shown in figure . here we have a concave lens l and its principal axis is x y . a ray of light ad parallel to the principal axis enters the concave lens . gets refracted at point d and goes in the direction dx . to a person looking into the concave lens from the right side . the refracted ray of light dx appears to be coming from the focus f of concave lens situated on its left side as shown by dotted line see figure .
 rule . a ray of light passing through the optical centre of a convex lens goes straight after refraction through the lens . it does not get deviated or bent . this is shown in figure . a ray of light ac is passing through the optical centre c of a convex lens . it goes straight in the direction cy after passing through the lens . it does not get deviated or bent from its original path see figure . please note that a ray of light going along the principal axis of a convex lens also passes straight through the lens without any deviation . in figure . the principal axis of the convex lens is x y . so . a ray of light going along the principal axis x y of this convex lens will also go straight without bending . we should keep this point in mind because in drawing ray diagrams . an object is always placed above the principal axis of a lens so that a ray of light coming from its bottom always goes straight through the lens along the principal axis .
illustrations one gram of coal on complete combustion liberates kj of heat . calculate the amount of coal required to liberate the same amount of heat that an electric heater of kw provides in one hour . ans . p e p xt kw s e kj kj of heat is liberated on burning g of coal kj of heat is liberated by burning
scattering of blue light red patch on screen source of white light convex screen transparent cardboard convex water containing glass tank lens suspended particles disc having of sulphur circular hole colloidal solution figure . an arrangement for observing the scattering of light in a colloidal solution to show how the sky appears blue . and the sun appears red at sunrise and sunset .
from the above table we find that the calorific value of kerosene oil is kj g . now . by saying that the calorific value of kerosene oil is kilojoules per gram . we mean that if gram of kerosene oil is burnt completely . then it will produce kilojoules of heat energy . actually . the term calorific value comes from the fact that the earlier unit of measurement of heat was calorie . these days . although we mostly use joule as the unit of heat but the term calorific value continues to be used as such . if we look up the table of calorific values . we will find that hydrogen gas has the highest calorific value of kilojoules per gram . thus . because of its high calorific value . hydrogen is an extremely good fuel . most of the common fuels are the compounds of hydrogen and carbon called hydrocarbons . since hydrogen has the highest calorific value . therefore . a fuel containing higher percentage of hydrogen will have a higher calorific value than
fleming s right hand rule for the direction of induced current the direction of induced current produced in a straight conductor or wire moving in a magnetic field is given by fleming s right hand rule . according to fleming s right hand rule hold the thumb . the forefinger and the centre finger of your right hand at right angles to one another as shown in figure b . adjust your hand in such a way that forefinger points in the direction of magnetic field . and thumb points in the direction of motion of conductor . then the direction in which centre finger points . gives the direction of induced current in the conductor .
 the velocity of light in glass is m s and that in air is m s . by how much would
the mirror equation relation between u . v . f for any spherical mirror of small aperture . and for any position of the object . the three quantities u . vand f satisfy the simple algebraic relation given below . mirror equation . . . . o u remember that u . v . f can be positive or negative depending on the geometry of the situation .
 . when the object lies between the focus f and the pole p or vertex v consider a ray starting from the top of the object and parallel to the principal axis . this ray after reflection from the mirror passes through the focus . another ray of light starting from the top of the object and passing through the centre of curvature retraces its path after reflection from the mirror . these two reflected rays seem to diverge from a point lying behind the mirror . the image is formed at this point fig . . this image is virtual . erect and magnified .
windmill a device used to convert wind energy into the mechanical energy is called windmill . construction it consists of a wheel with blades cut into its outer rim . the wheel rotates about an axle mounted on a pole . the wind energy is used to rotate the wheel about its axle . uses windmill is used for operating water pumps . grinders and is also used to produce electricity .
if shorter wavelengths are scattered most strongly there is a puzzle . as to why the sky does not appear violet . the colour with the shortest visible wavelength . the spectrum of light emission from the sun is not constant at all wavelengths and is absorbed by the high atmosphere . so there is less violet in the light . our eyes are also less sensitive to those colours .
electric current
 . uses of spherical mirrors concave mirror . to collect heat radiations in solar devices heat radiation from the sun coming from infinity is brought to focus by the concave mirror in its focal plane or at the focus . fig . . reflecting mirror for projector lamps the object is placed at the centre of curvature to obtain an image of the same size . . in flood lights the source of light is placed just beyond the centre of curvature . this illuminates a certain section of the ground . . in torches . head lights the source of light is placed at the focus to obtain a parallel beam of light . . shaving mirror . dentist mirror it produces an erect . virtual and highly magnified image of an object placed between its pole and focus . . it is used in the ophthalmoscope by doctors to concentrate light on a small region which is to be examined . . they are used to concentrate sunlight in solar farms .
image formation by a convex lens from lens formula . we find that for a lens of a fixed focal length f . as object distance u changes . image distance v also changes . moreover . as u decreases . v increase . this change the position . the nature and the size of the image .
the defect of eye called myopia or short sightedness is caused i due to high converging power of eye lens because of its short focal length . or ii due to eye ball being too long . in some cases . in an eye suffering from myopia . the ciliary muscles attached to the eye lens do not relax sufficiently to make the eye lens thinner to reduce its converging power . so . due to the greater converging power of the eye lens in myopic eye . the image of a distant object is formed in front of the retina and hence the eye cannot see it clearly . in other cases . in the eye suffering from myopia . the eye ball is too long due to
refraction at plane surface the bending of light ray as it passes obliquely from one transparent medium to another is called refraction . from snell s law . sin i uz sin r refractive . r i on refraction velocity and of light change but frequency remains same . refractive index u of medium c velocity of light in vacuum velocity of light in medium
rule . a ray of light passing through the focus of a convex lens becomes parallel to its principal axis after refraction through the lens . this rule is just the reverse case of the first rule and it is shown in figure . here a ray of light ad coming from the object is passing through the focus f of the convex lens . it enters the convex lens and gets refracted or bends at point d inside it . after passing through the convex lens . it becomes parallel to the principal axis of the lens and goes in the direction dx see figure .
 i rods are the rod shaped cells present in the retina of an eye which are sensitive to dim light . rods are the most important for vision in dim light as during the night . we can see things to some extent in a dark room or in the darkness of night due to the presence of rod cells in the retina of our eyes . nocturnal animals animals which sleep during the day and come out at night like the owl have a large number of rod cells in their retina which help them see properly during the night when there is not much light see figure . in fact . our night vision is relatively poor as compared to the night vision of an owl due to the presence of relatively smaller number of rod cells in the retinas of our eyes . rod cells of the retina . however . do not provide information about the colour of the object .
 . rays for locating image in a concave mirror for drawing the ray diagrams to locate the image formed by a spherical mirror . the following points should be kept in mind 
in white sunlight is scattered by the atmosphere which makes the sky appear blue . most of the blue light remains behind unscattered due to which the composition of sunlight remains almost unaltered . because of this the direct sunlight coming through the blue sky still appears to be white .
advantages of nuclear energy the advantages of nuclear energy are that i it produces a large amount of useful energy from a very small amount of a nuclear fuel like uranium . ii once the nuclear fuel like uranium is loaded into the reactor . the nuclear power plant can go on producing electricity for two to three years at a stretch . there is no need for putting in nuclear fuel again and again . iii it does not produce gases like carbon dioxide which contribute to greenhouse effect or sulphur dioxide which causes acid rain .
disadvantages of nuclear energy a the waste products of nuclear reactions produced at nuclear power plants are radioactive which keep on emitting harmful nuclear radiations for thousands of years . so . it is very difficult to store or dispose off nuclear wastes safely . improper nuclear waste storage or disposal can pollute the environment . b there is the risk of accidents in nuclear reactors especially the old nuclear reactors . such accidents lead to the leakage of radioactive materials which can cause serious damage to the plants . animals including human beings and the environment . c the high cost of installation of nuclear power plants and the limited availability of uranium fuel make the large scale use of nuclear energy prohibitive .
do you know presbyopia is a natural part of ageing process . it is not a disease and cannot be prevented . an eye can suffer from myopia . hypermetropia as well as astigmatism simultaneously . 
the screen on which the image is formed in the eye is called retina . the retina is behind the eye lens and at the back part of the eye . the retina of an eye is just like the film in a camera . the retina is a delicate membrane having a large number of light sensitive cells called rods and cones which respond to the intensity of light and colour of objects respectively . by generating electrical signals . at the junction of optic nerve and retina in the
scattering of light the phenomena of absorption of light and then re radiating it in different direction is called scattering of light . sun appears red at sunrise and sunset because red colour scattered least . sun appear white when it is overhead in the sky sun nearly overhead less blue scattered blue scattered away sun appears reddish sun near horizontal
a galvanometer is an instrument which can detect the presence of electric current in a circuit . it is connected in series with the circuit . when no current is flowing through a galvanometer . its pointer is at the zero mark in the centre of semi circular scale . when an electric current passes through the
from the above discussion we conclude that light is a form of energy which causes in us the sensation of sight . light travels in straight lines . the fact that a small source of light casts a sharp shadow of an opaque object tells us that light travels in a straight line path . this is because if light could bend easily and go behind the opaque object . then no shadow could be formed . we will now discuss the nature of light .
repeat the whole procedure to get some more curved lines . each time start from a new position near the north pole of the magnet . if you draw a tangent at any point on these lines . the magnetic field at that point will be along the tangent . a line such that the tangent at any point on it gives the direction of the magnetic field at that point is called a magnetic field line or magnetic line of force . figure . b shows some magnetic field lines due to a bar magnet . an arrow showing the direction of the field at a point has been drawn on each field line . remember that the field lines are imaginary . they just help us visualize magnetic fields . . you can see magnetic field lines with the help of iron filings too . place a glass or clear plastic sheet over a bar magnet . sprinkle some iron filings over the sheet . and gently tap the sheet . the iron filings will arrange themselves to show the magnetic field lines figure . c . you can make the following observations about magnetic field lines from figure . b . a all field lines are closed curves . they come out of the magnet from the side of the north pole and go into it on the side of the south pole . they continue inside the magnet too . although we cannot draw the lines inside the magnet . we know about them from other observations . b the field lines are close together near the poles and spread out away from them . the field is stronger where the field lines are more closely spaced . so . the field is stronger near the poles than at other points . c the field lines never intersect . if two field lines were to intersect then a compass needle placed at the point of intersection would point in two different directions which is not possible .
 why is energy of water flowing in a river considered to be an indirect form of solar energy ans . when sun rays fall on water bodies . water evaporates and forms clouds . these clouds produce rainfall and snowfall due to which we get flowing water . thus . water flowing in river is an indirect form of solar energy .
ocean thermal energy conversion plant otec otec is a power plant device used to harness ocean thermal energy and to produce electricity .
working of an a . c . generator suppose that the generator coil abcd is initially in the horizontal position as shown in figure . again suppose that the coil abcd is being rotated in the anticlockwise direction between the poles n and s of a horseshoe type magnet by rotating its shaft . i as the coil rotates in the anticlockwise direction . the side ab of the coil moves down cutting the magnetic field lines near the n pole of the magnet . and side cd moves up . cutting the magnetic field lines near the s pole of the magnet see figure . due to this . induced current is produced in the sides ab and cd of the coil . on applying fleming s right hand rule to the sides ab and cd of the coil . we find that the currents are in the directions b to a and d to c . thus . the induced currents in the two sides of the coil are in the same direction . and we get an effective induced current in the direction badc see figure . thus . in the first half revolution or rotation of coil . the current in the external circuit flows from brush b to b .
 . when the object lies at infinity consider two parallel rays incident on the lens . after refraction they pass through the focus . thus . the image is formed at the focus f of the lens fig . . when the object lies at infinity . then . the image is formed at the focus f . . the image is real . inverted and extremely diminished in size . . it is used in telescopes . camera lens . and burning glass .
 a current of . a passes through a conductor in seconds . how many electrons flow through this conductor from one end to the other end during this interval of time charge on each electron is . c . ans . here . i . a t s e . c пе using . i we get it . x n . x . 
numerical problems based on concave lenses we will now solve some numerical problems based on concave lenses by using the lens formula and the magnification formulae . here are some examples .
 . seeing colour and colour blindness in the retina . there are two types of light sensitive cells rod shaped and cone shaped . commonly called rods and cones . our eyes contain million skinny rod cells and million cone cells . the rod cells see black and white only and work best in dim light . the cone cells see colour and work best in bright light . so in dim light you lose colour vision . cone cells are of three types . one type of the cone cells absorbs blue light best . another absorbs green light best . and the third absorbs red light best . these three kinds of cones are all we have and all we need to see all the colours of the spectrum . when blue light falls on the retina . it stimulates the blue cone cells more than the other two types of cones .
 . . advantages of geothermal power . they can be operated round the clock . . geothermal energy is a clean source of energy . unlike coal . gas . or oil . the burning of a fossil fuel is not required . . geothermal fields produce only about one sixth of the carbon dioxide that a natural gas power plant produces . . it is a renewable source of energy and is free of cost . . the cost of electricity produced in half of that produced from conventional sources like coal .
 i short circuiting . if the plastic insulation of the live wire and neutral wire gets torn . then the two wires touch each other see figure . this touching of the live wire and neutral wire directly is known as short circuit . when the two wires touch each other . the resistance of the circuit so formed is very . very small . since the resistance is very small . the current flowing through the wires becomes very large and heats the wires to a dangerously high temperature . and a fire may be started .
the ratio of the height of image to the height of object is known as linear magnification . that is . magnification height of image height of object orm where m magnification h height of image and h height of object
 . . comparison of permanent magnet and an electromagnet the following table brings out the difference between a magnet and an electromagnet 
a . c . generators are used in power stations to generate electricity which is supplied to our homes . these days most of the cars are fitted with small a . c . generators commonly known as alternators . the bicycle dynamos are very small a . c . generators . we have just described a simple a . c . generator . in practical generators . the voltage and the current produced can be increased a by using a powerful electromagnet to make the magnetic field stronger in place of a permanent magnet . b by winding the coil round a soft iron core to increase the strength of magnetic field . c by using a coil with more turns .
lens formula a formula which gives the relationship between image distance v . object distance u . and focal length f of a lens is known as the lens formula . the lens formula can be written as m studygear v uf where v image distance u object distance and f focal length this lens formula applies to both types of spherical lenses convex lenses as well as concave lenses . please note that the lens formula differs from the mirror formula only in the sign between and . the mirror formula is whereas the lens formula is . it is clear that the mirror formula has a plus sign between and whereas the lens formula has a minus sign between and . the values of v and u should be substituted in the lens formula with their proper signs . v
a single solar cell can produce only a small amount of electricity . in those cases where more electrical power is needed . a large number of solar cells are joined together in series . this group of solar cells is called a solar cell panel . thus . a solar cell panel consists of a large number of solar cells joined together in a definite pattern see figure . a solar cell panel can provide much more electric power than a single solar cell . the various solar cells in a solar cell panel are joined together by using connecting wires made of silver metal . this is because silver is the best conductor of electricity . the use of silver for connecting solar cells makes it more expensive but it increases the efficiency of solar cell panel . at many places . the solar cell panels are mounted u on specially designed inclined roofs so that more solar energy or sunlight is incident on them .
i a b c fig . in oersted s experiment . a compass is placed directly over a horizontal wire here viewed from above . a the needle points north when there is no current . b the needle swings towards the east when the current flows north . c the needle swings west when the current flows south . when the compass is placed directly under the wire . the needle swings are reversed .
resistance from equation . . so . for a given potential difference . thus . for a given potential difference . the current is inversely proportional to the resistance . the higher is the resistance . the lower is the current . if the resistance is doubled . the current is halved . good conductors have low resistance . while insulators have very high resistance . unit of resistance potential difference is measured in volts . and current is measured in amperes . from equation . . r vſi . so . the unit of resistance is volt ampere . this unit is called the ohm . and its symbol is . we can define one ohm as follows . if a potential difference of volt is applied across an element . and a current of ampere passes through it . the resistance of the element is called ohm .
please note that the optical density of a substance is different from its mass density . a substance may have a higher optical density than another substance but its mass density may be less . for example . kerosene having a higher refractive index than water is optically denser than water though its mass density is less than that of water . we have been using the terms rarer medium and denser medium in our discussions . it actually means optically rarer medium and optically denser medium .
the nucleus of tritium hº so formed can again fuse with a deuterium nucleus hº hp he on . mev the net result of these two reactions is that three deuterium nuclei fuse together to form a helium nucleus and release . mev energy which is obtained in the form of kinetic energy of proton h and neutron on .
plane mirrors the image formed by a plane mirror is virtual . erect . laterally inverted . of the same size as the object . and at the same distance from the mirror as the object .
reflection from convex and concave surfaces asus odobno oblogger eese caserta correcursrece sebe be see be outside bowl inside bowl fig . the outside of a highly polished spoon acts as a convex mirror and the inside as a concave mirror .
 . a ray of light passing through the focus after refraction becomes parallel to the principal axis . f vkmfganeskkwwwಯದ convex lens concave lens fig . a ray of light passing through the focus or directed towards it travels parallel to the principal axis after refraction through the lens .
 iii near the centre of the coil . the field lines are nearly straight and parallel . as such the magnetic field at the centre of the coil can be taken to be uniform .
in the retina there are million rod and million cone cells . which are sensitive to light . the rod cells see black and white and work best in dim light . the cone cells see colour and work best in bright light .
we know that when two similar resistance wires are connected in series . then their combined resistance gets doubled but when they are connected in parallel then their combined resistance gets halved . so . a given current will produce more heat per unit time if the two resistances are connected in series than when they are connected in parallel . c since the heat produced in a wire is directly proportional to the time for which current flows η αt so . if the current is passed through a wire for double the time . then the heat produced is doubled . and if the time is halved . the heat produced is also halved . we will now solve some problems based on the heating effect of current . please note that the formula h r x t for calculating the heat produced can be used only if the current i . resistance rand time t are known to us . in some cases . however . they give us the power p and time t only . in that case the heat energy is to be calculated by using the formula e p x t .
the temperature in case of a parabolic type solar cooker is about c .
boting that on moving an obiect from infinity towards a convex lens we find that the image moves away from the focus of the lens . it is real inverted and diminished . but the size of the image gradually increases . the size of the image becomes equal to that of the object at f . on further moving the object towards the lens upto its focus . the image shifts away from f on the other side of the lens and remains real and inverted . but now it is magnified . if object is further moved towards the lens . the image shifts to the side of the object and is now magnified . virtual and erect .
 . . oscillating water column wave energy oscillating water column can be used to generate electricity . it is the simplest way to harness ocean waves to produce electricity . an oscillating water column generator consists of a rigid . hollow structure erected on the shore such that a part of the structure is below the water . as a wave strikes the structure . the level of water inside it increases . compressing the air above it .
pipe . the slurry is left in digester tank for to days . this dung undergoes anaerobic fermentation and forms biogas which collects in the gas holder . as more and more biogas collects in the gas holder the pressure of gas in it increases and it raises the gas holder . since the gas holder cannot rise up beyond a certain point . the increased gas pressure pushes the spent slurry from the digester tank into the overflow tank . this spent slurry is taken off and used as manure . more fresh slurry is added and thus biogas is produced continuously .
 . the pollution of air caused by burning coal in thermal power plants and factories can also be controlled by installing electrostatic precipitators in their chimneys . when an electrostatic precipitator is installed in the chimney . then the unburnt carbon particles and fly ash particles present in smoke keep on depositing on the inner walls of the chimney and do not go into air . the deposit of carbon and fly ash particles can be removed by sweeping the chimney from time to time .
in figure a we have a cell having a positive terminal and a negative terminal . the positive terminal of the cell is connected to one end of the bulb holder with a copper wire called connecting wire through a switch . the negative terminal of the cell is connected to the other end of bulb holder . in figure a the switch is closed . so . the circuit in figure a is complete and hence a current flows in this circuit . this current makes the bulb light up see figure a .
when the image formed by a spherical mirror is real . it is also inverted and is nd is on the same side of the mirror as the object . since both v and u are negative the magnification is negative . when the image formed by a spherical mirror is virtual . it is also erect and is on the other side of the mirror as the object . in this case . u is ve and vis ve . therefore . m is positive . if m is positive . the image is erect w . r . t . the object and if m is negative . the image is inverted w . rit . the object .
horsepower is used to measure the power of engines of vehicles . hp w electric energy is defined as the total amount of work done to maintain current in a circuit in a given time . electric energy consumed by a device is given by . w pxt kwh is called a unit of electricity . energy consumed is measured in kilowatt hour . kwh . j
the speed of light in vacuum is same for all wavelengths . but the speed in a material substance is different for different wavelengths . the splitting of white light into its constituent wavelengths is called dispersion of light .
by dipping another wire from the negative terminal of the battery into the mercury pool as shown in figure . we know that mercury is a liquid which is a good conductor of electricity . so the circuit is completed through mercury contained in the vessel v .
hypermetropia far sightedness or long sightedness a human eye which can see far off objects or distant objects clearly but can not see the near by objects clearly is said to be suffered with a defect known as long sightedness or far sightedness or hypermetropia .
 . solar cell a solar cell . more aptly called a solar photovoltaic cell pv cell converts the incident solar light energy directly into electrical energy in dc form . solar pv systems have become commercially successful since s . a single cell of pure silicon of square centimetre size has a rated voltage of about . v and rated power of about . w .
alloy of nickel . chromium . manganese and iron having a resistivity of about times more than that of copper .
a typical cell develops a voltage of . v and can produce about . w of electricity a solar cell is made of a semiconductor either silicon or germanium or gallium . s econd s alah be dj s egeta est resses esse fig . a solar cell panel used for lighting street lights .
screen . the image formed by a plane mirror is virtual image . if you stand in front of a plane mirror . you can see your image in the mirror . but . if you place a drawing sheet in front of your body . your image is not formed on it . this shows that virtual images cannot be obtained on screens . the rays of light forming a virtual image are shown as dashed lines in a ray diagram . a virtual image is always erect upright and is formed behind the mirror or on the same side as that of the object in case of a lens .
the effect of electric current due to which heat is produced in a wire when current is passed through it is called heating effect of current or joule heating . in accordance with joule s law of heating . if a current i flows through a resistor of resistance r for a time t . then the heat produced across the resistor is h baru also . w vit
resistance of a conductor the electric current is a flow of electrons through a conductor . when the electrons move from one part of the conductor to the other part . they collide with other electrons and with the atoms and ions present in the body of the conductor . due to these collisions . there is some obstruction or opposition to the flow of electron current through the conductor . the property of a conductor due to which it opposes the flow of current through it is called resistance . the resistance of a conductor is numerically equal to the ratio of potential difference across its ends to the current flowing through it . that is potential difference resistance current or r 
accommodation of an eye a normal eye can see the near and far off objects clearly if the sharp images of these objects are formed on the retina . since the distance between the eye lens and retina is fixed i . e . . v constant . so to see the objects at different positions from the eye lens . the focal length of the lens has to be changed accordingly . to form the sharp images of these objects 
xerography you know about many applications of electric current . but can you name one application of electric charge most photocopying machines are based on the properties of electric charges . a photocopying machine has a powerful light source and a system of mirrors and lenses which forms an image of the original document on a roller made of a special
 . . presbyopia it is the defect of eye which comes with age . with ageing the power of accommodation of the eye usually decreases . the eye is no more able to focus the nearby objects on to the retina . as a result the near point of the eye increases . for a years old person this becomes as much as cm . as a result they cannot read distinctly without the corrective glasses . this defect is in fact old age hypermetropia .
laws of refraction of light the refraction of light on going from one medium to another takes place according to two laws which are known as the laws of refraction of light . these are given below .
 a rectangular coil of area a . having number of turns n is rotated at f revolutions per second in a uniform magnetic field b . the field being perpendicular to the coil . prove that the maximum emf induced in the coil is nf nba . ans . the magnetic flux linked with coil at any instant of time t is nba coso nba cos wt
live . neutral and earth wires the electric power lines enter our house through three wires the live wire . the neutral wire and the earth wire . what are these the live wire is at volts . the ground wire is maintained at zero potential by connecting it to a large plate buried in the ground . and the neutral wire is also maintained at almost zero potential . current enters an appliance through the live wire and returns through the neutral wire . an appliance that consumes relatively low power . e . g . . a tube light or a fan . has just two terminals . using them . the appliance is connected across the live and neutral wires . appliances such as heaters . electric irons . refrigerators . etc . . have a third terminal . called the earth terminal . this terminal is connected to the metallic body of the appliance . the earth wire of the electric supply is connected to this terminal . this ensures that the metallic body is always at ground potential v . the earth wire does not normally carry a current . in two terminal devices such as a bulb . it does not matter which terminal is connected to the live wire and which . to the neutral . but in an appliance such as an iron . if the live wire gets connected to the ground terminal . the body will be at v . anybody touching the body would get an electric shock . to prevent incorrect connections . the colour of the insulation of a wire is used to identify the type of wire . by convention . red is for live . black is for neutral and green is for earth . in the plug of a heater or a toaster . you will find wires of these colours connected to the terminals of the pins marked l . n and e . all electrical appliances are connected across the neutral and live wires . the same potential difference is therefore . applied to all of them . and hence . they get connected in parallel to the power source . for each electric appliance and electrical socket connected to household wiring .
direction of current of fig . . current in a wire connected to a cell
 . . dc generator a dc generator also called a dc dynamo converts mechanical energy into electrical energy dc . principle it works on the principle that when a coil rotates in a uniform magnetic field . a current is induced in the coil . the direction of induced current is determined by fleming s right hand rule . construction a dc generator consists of the following components as shown in figure . .
along the same path . the two reflected rays intersect at a . thus . a is the real image of point a of the object . to get the complete image . we draw a b perpendicular to the axis . thus . a b is the complete image of the object ab . it is clear from figure that the image a b is formed between the focus f and centre of curvature c . the image is real and inverted . it is smaller in size than the object ab . so we call it a diminished image . from the above discussion we conclude that when an object is placed beyond the centre of curvature c of a concave mirror . the image formed is i between the focus and centre of curvature . ii real and inverted . and iii smaller than the object or diminished .
appear to diverge after passing through the concave lens . in figure . the parallel rays of light appear to be diverging from point f after refraction . so . f is the principal focus of the concave lens for the light rays coming from the left side . like a convex lens . a concave lens also has two foci . one on each side of the concave lens . for example . if the parallel rays fall on the concave lens from the right side . then they will appear to diverge from a point f . thus . f is the second focus of the concave lens . a concave lens is also
figure shows a pool of water or a tank of water . let us take any point o at the bottom of this pool . this point is under the surface of water . our eye sees this point by the light rays coming from it . now . a ray of light oa coming from the point o is travelling in water and it comes out into the air at point a . it gets refracted away from the normal in the direction ax see figure . similarly . another ray of light ob . coming from the point o gets refracted at point b and goes away from the normal in the direction by . the
the electric motor a motor is a device which converts electrical energy into mechanical energy . every motor has a shaft or spindle which rotates continuously when current is passed into it . the rotation of its shaft is used to
in the fissioning of uranium . some mass of uranium disappears is lost . and a tremendous amount of energy is produced . an idea of the tremendous amount of energy produced during nuclear fission reaction can be had from the fact that the fission of atom of uranium produces million times more energy than the energy produced by the burning of atom of carbon from coal . the energy produced during nuclear fission reactions is used for generating electricity at nuclear power plants . please note that the energy produced in a fission reaction is due to the conversion of mass into energy .
fusion is the process of combining two nuclei to form a heavy nucleus . but nuclei have positive charges and thus repel each other . however . if they can be brought close enough together within m . the attractive force comes into play . which can pull the nuclei together and fusion will occur . in order for the nuclei to get close enough together . they must have very high kinetic energy . this high energy can be imparted by raising the temperature to a very high degree of the order of k a temperature usually found in the core of the stars . this temperature is very difficult to obtain . however . this can be triggered by atomic explosions involving nuclear fission . once the fusion reaction begins . the energy liberated can maintain the minimum required temperature and the fusion continues . at this stage the fusion of hydrogen gets out of control and leads to an explosion of what is called a hydrogen bomb .
 . electric potential and potential difference when two bodies at different temperatures are brought in contact with each other . heat flows from the body at a higher temperature . to the body at lower temperature . the more the temperature difference . more is the flow of heat . similarly . water also flows from a higher pressure to the lower pressure . as shown in figure . . the pump builds up and maintains pressure to push water from the reservoir to the top . from the top . the water falls down under the effect of gravity . for flow of charges in a conducting metallic wire gravity . of course . has no role to play the electrons move only if there is a difference of electric pressure called the potential difference along the conductor . this difference in potential is produced by a cell or battery . in a cell . chemical reactions produce potential difference between the two terminals of the cell . as a result . the positive charge flows from higher potential to lower potential and the negative charge flows from lower potential to higher potential .
effects of refraction of light the refraction of light produces many effects which can be easily observed in our day to day life . we will now describe some of the important effects of the refraction of light . it is due to the refraction of light that i a stick or pencil held obliquely and partly immersed in water appears to be bent at the water surface . ii an object placed under water appears to be raised . iii a pool of water appears to be less deep than it actually is . iv when a thick glass slab is placed over some printed matter . the letters appear raised when viewed from the top . v a lemon kept in water in a glass tumbler appears to be bigger than its actual size . when viewed from the sides . vi the stars appear to twinkle on a clear night . all these effects are produced by the refraction of light or change in direction of light when it passes from one medium to another . let us discuss some of these effects of refraction in detail .
when a short circuit takes place . or when overloading takes place . the current becomes large and heats the fuse wire too much . since the melting point of fuse wire is much lower than copper wires . the fuse wire melts and breaks the circuit as shown in figure b . when the fuse wire breaks . electricity supply is automatically switched off before any damage can be done to the rest of the wiring or the electrical appliances being used .
summary of the images formed by a concave lens position of objects position of image size of image nature of image . anywhere between between optical diminished virtual and erect optical centre centre c and c and infinity . focus f . at infinity at focus f highly diminished virtual and erect
the box type solar cooker can be used to cook only those food materials which require slow heating . the box type solar
 since fusion reaction is temperature dependent . therefore . it is also called a thermonuclear reaction .
gre . e sate lio b ene recega sececececea ch ar ago st . notas gecese order ben edece ess gaceta recette res de go ecc pers ive sar be ie wishlisere les ero stus w hare te it can be clearly seen from the above cases that . as an object is moved from infinity towards the pole of a concave mirror . the image moves from the focus towards the centre of curvature . increasing in size from a point size at the focus to the same size as the object . at the centre of curvature . as the object moves further towards the focus . the image moves towards infinity . increasing in size and always remaining real and inverted . when the object is at the focus . the image is formed at infinity . when the object is moved closer the image becomes virtual and is formed behind the mirror .
f a f f f image fig . image formation by a convex lens when the object is placed beyond f .
 ii the field lines are in the same direction in the space enclosed by the coil .
oersted discovery experimental evidence of relation between electricity and magnetism take a long straight copper wire . two or three cells of . v each . and a plug key . connect all of them in series as shown in fig . a . place the straight wire parallel to and over a compass needle . plug the key in the circuit .
 . . diverging or concave lens figure . shows a diverging lens or a concave lens . the beam of parallel rays incident on this lens diverges after refraction . the focal length of a concave lens is negative and the lens is also called a negative lens . the focal points of a negative lens are reversed . relative to those of a positive lens . the second focal point f . of a negative lens is the point from which rays that are originally parallel to the axis diverge after refraction . a concave lens is thicker at the edges and thinner at the centre .
since a magnetic needle can be deflected only due to the presence of a magnetic field . therefore . oersted concluded that a magnetic field is produced around the current carrying wire .
all the solar heating devices are designed in such a way that they help in collecting as much sun s heat rays as possible . this is done by using a black painted surface . a glass sheet cover . and in some cases also a plane mirror reflector . a black painted surface is used because black surface absorbs more heat rays of the sun than a white surface . a glass sheet is used as a cover in solar heating devices because a glass sheet traps more and more of sun s heat rays by producing greenhouse effect . a plane mirror reflector is used in solar cooker to increase the area over which solar energy is collected so that more heat rays of the sun may enter the solar cooker box . keeping these points in mind we will now describe the construction and working of a solar cooker in detail .
 b b between f and c between infinity and the centre of curvature c real . smaller than the object . inverted
magnetic field the most striking thing about magnets is the attraction and repulsion between them . how do we explain these forces between two magnets we say that a magnet produces a magnetic field in the space around it . which exerts a force on any other magnet placed in it . each point in this field has a particular strength . the field at each point also has a definite direction . the direction of the magnetic field due to a magnet at a point near it can be found by placing a magnetic compass at that point . the compass needle comes to rest along a particular direction . the direction of the magnetic field at the point is the direction from the south pole to the north pole of the needle . when a magnetic compass is kept at a place which is away from all magnets . its needle comes to rest along the north south direction . this means that the direction of the magnetic field there is from the south to the north . this field is produced by the earth . the magnetic field of the earth also affects a compass needle placed near a magnet . the direction of the compass needle gives the direction of the net magnetic field due to the bar magnet and the earth . however . if the compass is close to the magnet . the contribution due to the earth s field may be neglected . to find out how the direction of the magnetic field changes at different places near a magnet . do the following activities .
when the above two expressions are combined . then the expression obtained for the magnetic field around a straight current carrying conductor is kl b where i is the current through the conductor and r is the distance of the point of observation from the straight conductor . here . k is a constant about which you will learn in higher classes . the current i is measured in ampere a and the distance r is measured in metre m .
it is obvious from the circuit given in figure that all the electrical appliances are provided with separate switches . it should be noted that all the switches are put in the live wire . so that when we switch off an electrical appliance like an electric iron . then its connection with the live wire is cut off and there will be no danger of an electric shock if we touch the metal case of the electrical appliance . if . however . we put switches in the neutral wire . then the live wire will be in connection with the electrical appliance even when the switch is in the off position . and there is a danger of an electric shock .
 . when the object lies at the centre of curvature c consider a ray starting from the top of the object and parallel to the principal axis . this ray after reflection from the mirror passes through the focus . another ray of light starting from the top of the object and passing through the focus becomes parallel to the principal axis after reflection from the mirror . these two reflected
 iii magnetic compass magnetic compass is a simple device to find the directions . it has a small magnet which is pivoted at its centre so that it can rotate freely in its horizontal plane . and always point towards north south direction of the earth . after coming to rest .
permanent magnet . its magnetic field is permanent except when roughly handed or heated . . once made its magnetic field strength cannot be changed . . during its operation its strength cannot be varied . . its polarity cannot be reversed . . it has only a few applications .
a fuel should be able to provide adequate energy . should be convenient to use . easily transported and easily stored .
biogas is obtained by anaerobic fermentation of animal waste like . animal dung . and plant wastes in the presence of water .
uses of coal i it is used as a fuel . ii it is used in manufacturing coke . iii it is used in producing electricity in thermal plants . iv it is used in manufacturing synthetic petrol and synthetic natural gas . v it is used in manufacturing industrial fuel gases . i . e . . water gas and producer gas .
 . . . merits of wind energy following are the merits of wind energy . it is an important renewable energy available free of cost . . it is clean and pollution free source of energy . . it is economically competitive . . it is a very useful source in rural and remote areas where other sources of energy are not available .
the lines of force in a magnetic field are those imaginary lines which continuously represent the direction of the magnetic field . the tangent drawn at any point on a line of force shows the direction of magnetic field at that point .
electromagnetic induction using two coils so far we have learnt that electromagnetic induction can be brought about by moving a straight wire between the poles of a u shaped magnet or by moving a bar magnet in a circular coil of wire . we will now study that electromagnetic induction can also be produced by using two coils . this is because if current is changed in one coil . then current is induced in the other coil kept near it . no relative motion of the coils is needed in this case . this will become more clear from the following discussion . two circular coils a and b are placed side by side . close to each other see figure . coil a is connected to a battery and a switch s whereas coil b is connected to a galvanometer g .
direction of electric field . the potential continually decreases along the path . now if another path is considered from the uncharged conductor to infinity . the potential again continually decreases . obviously . the uncharged conductor is at intermediate potential between the charged conductor and infinity .
light is a form of electromagnetic wave which excites in us the sensation of sight .
 . when the object is at infinity consider two rays coming from infinity . where the object is placed . these rays . after reflection from the mirror . seem to come from the focus . this is the image of the distant object fig . . this image formed is virtual . erect and extremely diminished .
current . the magnetic field and the force . are at right angles to one another . it should be noted that the maximum force is exerted on a current carrying conductor only when it is perpendicular to the direction of magnetic field . no force acts on a current carrying conductor when it is parallel to the magnetic field . if we reverse the direction of current in the wire ab so that it flows in the vertically upward direction from b to a . then the wire swings in the backward direction towards north . this means that the direction
refractive index light travels the fastest in vacuum with the highest speed of x m s . in air . the speed of light is only marginally less . compared to that in vacuum . but for all practical purposes . we consider the speed of light in air equal to the speed of light in vacuum . however speed of light decreases in denser media like water . glass etc . it means when light goes from air to some other medium like water and glass . its speed decreases . the amount of change in the speed of light in a medium depends upon the property of the medium . this property is known as refractive index of the medium . refractive index is a measure of how much the speed of light changes when it enters a medium from air .
finding the image of extended objects the image of an extended object formed by a spherical mirror can be found by locating the images of the individual points of the object . one case of interest is that of a small . linear object placed on the principal axis . perpendicular to it . we can find the whole image by just locating the images of the points at the top and bottom of the object .
harnessing energy tidal energy can be harnessed by constructing a tidal barrage or tidal dam . this barrage traps the water risen during the high tide . the trapped water is then allowed to fall down slowly on turbines water wheels to start them rotating . the rotating turbines generate electricity .
correction of presbyopia i this is corrected by using a convex lens of suitable power . which is added to glasses . if any for the distant vision . ii sometimes a person may suffer from both the defects of vision . i . e . . myopia and hypermetropia . such type of defects can be corrected by using bifocal lenses which consist of both concave and convex lenses . concave convex
images formed by a concave mirror table . shows the formation of image by a concave mirror in several situations . you should carefully study each ray diagram and verify its entries in the table . in case a . the object ab is at infinity . and the rays coming from b are parallel to the principal axis . they meet at the focus . where a real . point sized image is formed . in actual practice . we may be interested in looking at an object that is at a very large but finite distance . in that case . a very small . inverted image is formed . close to the focus . case b is the same as that shown in figure . a . and the ray diagram has already been explained . in case c . the ray bd passes through the focus f after reflection . the ray bf becomes parallel to the principal axis after reflection . the reflected rays meet at b . the image a b is inverted . has the same size as the object and is formed at the same distance from the mirror . in case d . the reflected rays intersect beyond c and an enlarged magnified . inverted image is formed .
when an object is placed in front of a plane mirror . then the right side of object appears to become the left side of image and the left side of object appears to become the right side of image . this change of sides of an object and its mirror image is called lateral inversion . the phenomenon of lateral
do you an electron microscope uses an electron beam in place of light to see images of very small objects . it has a magnifying power of more than . . . it is used to see images of atoms and molecules . know
 . attractive property a magnet can attract small pieces of magnetic substances like iron . steel . cobalt . alnico etc . the attraction is a maximum at the two ends called the poles . it is minimum or zero at the centre of the magnet . if some iron filings are sprinkled near a bar magnet they orient themselves as shown in figure . .
colour of the sun at sunrise and sunset at the time of sunrise and sunset . the position of the sun is very far away from us . the sunlight travels longer distance through the atmosphere of the earth before reaching our eyes . scattering of blue light is more than the scattering of red light . as a result of this . more red light reaches our eyes than any other colour . therefore at sunset and sunrise sun appears red .
displacement is directly proportional to i angle of incidence ii thickness of glass slab . and iii refractive index of glass slab . higher the values of these factors . greater will be the lateral displacement . another point to be noted is that in this case the refraction or bending of light takes place twice first at point o when light enters from air into glass . and then at point b when light goes out from glass into air . the angle which the emergent ray makes with the normal
a suspension of small particles in a medium is called a colloid . milk is a colloid in which small fat particles are suspended in water . smoke is a colloid in which ash particles are suspended in air . fog and mist are colloids in which droplets of water are suspended in air . you will be able to see the path of a strong beam of fig . . scattering makes the beams of headlights visible in fog . light through all of these . the scattering of light by the particles in a colloidal solution is called the tyndall effect . the scattered light makes the path of light visible . the activity above is also an example of the tyndall effect .
 . ammeter it is an instrument used to measure the current in a circuit . it is always connected in series in a circuit . it has a positive terminal . through which current enters . and a negative terminal . through which current leaves . fig . . the resistance of an ideal ammeter is zero . . galvanometer it is an instrument used to detect weak currents in a circuit . it is joined in series in a circuit . it does not have a positive or a negative terminal . it can also detect the direction of current in a circuit . . ground this symbol is used when the circuit is connected to the earth . . key open it is an arrangement of making or breaking a circuit . when the key is not plugged the circuit is an open circuit . . key closed when the key is plugged the circuit becomes a closed circuit .
danger signals are of red colour when light falls on the signal . all colours are scattered much more than that of red colour . so the red colour suffering least scattering remains confined around the signal . which in turn illuminates the signal significantly . thus . the danger signals can be seen from very far off distances . moreover . among all colours . red colour or red light is scattered least by smoke or fog . hence red signals are visible even through the smoke or fog .
it is worth noting that as we move away from the straight current carrying conductor the distance between the magnetic field lines increases continuously . this shows that as we move away from the conductor the magnetic field decreases continuously fig . . thus . the concentric circles become larger and larger as we move away from the current carrying conductor .
reflection will also be see figure . and if the angle of incidence is changed to . then the angle of reflection will also change and become see figure . in every case . the angle of reflection remains equal to the angle of incidence .
 you are given following current time graphs from two different sources . current current current time of . . . time in s source i source ii i name the type of current in two cases . ii identify any one source for each type of these currents . iii what is the frequency of current in source ii in india iv use above graphs to write three differences between the currents in the two cases . ans . i source i represents direct current dc whereas source ii represents alternating current ac . ii source i may be a dry cell or a voltaic cell and source ii is an ac generator .
seabed fig . an oscillating water column wave power generator .
galvanometer . then its pointer deflects or moves either to the left side of zero mark or to the right side of the zero mark . depending on the direction of current . we will describe the experiments now .
 . the tremendous amount of energy released during fission is due to mass defect . the sum of the mass of fragments produced and neutrons released during fission is less than the sum of the mass of target u nucleus and bombarding neutrons . for example . the loss in mass during fission can be derived as u on ba kr n in amu . . . . . . . . . thus . mass defect . am . . . amu . amu . mev ae am . from einstein equation . ae amc . x . mev thus . for the fission of each nucleus of uranium . about mev energy is released . it is also evident that about . . amu out of amu of the total mass undergoes decay and produces energy . note that most of the energy is released out in the form of kinetic energy . the pressure and temperature increases tremendously during fission .
this refractive index is called the absolute refractive index . the refractive index is a dimensionless number greater than one since v is always less than c . furthermore n is equal to unity or one for vacuum .
types of electric charges it has been found by experiments that there are two types of electric charges positive charges and negative charges . by convention . the charge acquired by a glass rod rubbed with a silk cloth is called positive charge and the charge acquired by an ebonite rod rubbed with a woollen cloth is called negative charge . an important property of electric charges is that 
the first prism is known as dispersing prism as dispersion takes place at the first face of prism a and second prism b recombines the dispersed colours therefore it is known as recombination prism . both the prism a and b together act as a glass slab with parallel sides . and emergent ray is parallel to the incident ray .
 . . colour of the sky the molecules of air and other fine particles in the atmosphere have size comparable to the wavelength of visible light . these are . therefore . more effective in scattering light of shorter wavelengths at the blue end than light of longer wavelengths at the red end . thus . when sunlight passes through the atmosphere . the fine particles in air scatter the blue colour shorter wavelengths more strongly than red . the scattered blue light enters our eyes . if the earth had no atmosphere . there would not have been any scattering and the sky would appear to be dark as it appears on the moon . since red colour is scattered less . therefore . danger signals are of red colour .
f fig . image formation by a convex lens when the object is placed at infinity .
deep coal mines under the surface of earth . coal is important because it can be used as a source of energy as such . or it can be converted into other forms of energy like coal gas . electricity and oil synthetic petrol . the exploitation of coal as a source of energy made the industrial revolution possible . when coal is burnt . the carbon present in coal reacts with the oxygen of air to form carbon dioxide . a lot of heat is produced during the burning of coal which makes it a good fuel . the burning of coal . however . produces a lot of smoke which pollutes the air . when coal is subjected to destructive distillation by heating strongly in the absence of air . then all the volatile material is removed from coal and coke is formed . coke is carbon . coke is a better fuel than coal because it produces more heat than an equal mass of coal . and it does not produce smoke while burning . thus . burning of coke does not cause air pollution .
the colours of the spectrum can be recombined to form white light by using a second prism as shown in fig . .
magnetic field due to current carrying straight conductor or wire finite length wire nq magnetic field due to id finite length wire at point p . b . mol . sin . sin nd . tạo infinite length wire magnetic field due semi infinite length wire point p . at me . b . mol sin sin nd b . moi bp rd semi infinite length wire op magnetic field due to it semi infinite length wire at point p ma . . . åd op mol p . sin sin it bp sin d specialsemiinfinitewire magnetic field due to special semi infinite length wire at point p sin sin l or m . þ d sin sin bp mol
illustrations a circuit has a fuse of a . what is the maximum number of w v bulbs that can be safely used in the circuit ans . here . power . p w voltage . v v now current . imax a number of bulbs which can be used n from relation . p vi we have . i putting values . we get a a for bulb . in parallel . imax n i we have . n max putting values . we get n x eleven bulbs can be used safely in the circuit .
electric power
 . . electric fuse nature and function an electric fuse is a short length of easily fusible wire put into an electrical circuit for protection purposes . it is arranged to melt blow at a definite current .
in figure we have a convex lens with optical centre c and two foci f and f . the object ab has been placed between the optical centre c and focus f so that it is at a distance less than the focal length f of the
now the beam of light coming from the near object is focused by the lens on the retina . hence the object is seen clearly . conclusion thus . we observe that the focal length of the eye lens is adjusted automatically by the action of ciliary muscles such that a sharp images of the objects at different positions from the eye are formed on the retina . this process is known as accommodation of an eye . the ability of an eye to change the focal length of its lens in such a way that the sharp image of an object at different positions from the eye is formed on the retina is known as accommodation of an eye .
 . the direct current electric motor an electric motor is a device that converts electrical energy into mechanical energy kinetic energy . there are two kinds of motors that we use in our day to day life i ac motor that uses ac supply . e . g . . motor of a fan . ii dc motor that uses dc supply . e . g . . motors of battery operated toys . here . we will study a simple dc direct current motor .
unit of power we have calculated the power by dividing work done by time taken . now . the unit of work is joule and that of time is second . so . the unit of power is joules per second . this unit of power is called watt . thus . the si unit of electric power is watt which is denoted by the letter w . the power of watt is a rate of working of joule per second . that is . joule watt second
scattering of light scattering of light means to throw light in various random directions . light is scattered when it falls on various types of suspended particles in its path . depending on the size of particles . the scattering can be of white sunlight as such or of the coloured lights which make up the white sunlight . as we will study after a while . the blue colour of the sky and the red colour of the sun at sunrise and at sunset can be explained on the basis of scattering of light caused by the earth s atmosphere or air see figure . we will first describe the tyndall effect .
magnetic field due to currents in coils and solenoids the direction of the magnetic field at a point on the axis of a current carrying circular coil or a loop a can be found from the following rule . if the fingers of the right hand are curled along the direction of the current in a loop . the stretched thumb gives the direction of the magnetic field . at other points . the direction may be different . the magnetic field inside a current carrying solenoid is nearly uniform and is parallel to the axis . the field outside the solenoid is similar to that produced by a bar magnet . if you hold the solenoid in your right hand . with fingers curled along the current . the thumb gives the direction of the field within it . as well as the direction in which the north pole of the solenoid appears .
 . . parallel combination of resistors a number of resistors are said to be connected in parallel if . there is more than one path for current to flow between two points . . one end of each resistor is connected to one common point and the other end to some other common point . . the potential difference across each resistor is same . consider three resistors r . r and rz connected in parallel as shown in figure . b . when the current i reaches point a . it splits into three parts i going through ry . i . going through r and iz going through rz . the current will tend to take the path of least resistance .
a transparent material bounded by two surfaces of which at least one is curved is called a lens . most lenses used in spectacles . magnifying glasses . cameras and microscopes have at least one spherical surface . in some cases . cylindrical lenses are used in spectacles . in this chapter we will study spherical lenses . the cross sections of some lenses are shown in figure . . a lens that is thicker at the middle than at the edges is called a convex lens . while a lens that is thicker at the edges is called a concave lens . if someone in your family uses spectacles . find out by feeling the lenses whether they are
fuse wire will melt if the current exceeds amperes value . the fuse used in the power circuit of a small house for running electric iron . immersion heater . geyser and toaster . etc . . having power of watts or more is of a capacity . a blown fuse should be replaced only after the cause of excessive current flow has been found and removed . these days more and more houses are using miniature circuit breakers mcbs to protect the household wiring from the excessive flow of electric current through it see figure . if the current becomes too large . the miniature circuit breaker puts off a switch cutting off the electric supply . the mcb can be re set when the fault has been corrected . miniature circuit beaker mcb contains an electromagnet which . when the current exceeds the rated value of circuit breaker . becomes strong enough to separate a pair of contacts by putting off a switch and breaks the circuit . so . unlike fuses . mcbs do not work on heating effect of current . mcbs work on the magnetic effect of current .
position of object no . . at infinity beyond the centre of curvature . at the centre of curvature . between focus and the centre of curvature at the principal focus . between the pole and the principal focus
magnification the size of an image formed by a plane mirror is the same as that of the object . this is not always the case with spherical mirrors . a convex mirror forms an image that is smaller than the object . you might have noticed this in the rear view mirrors of vehicles . the size of the image formed by a concave mirror can be smaller than . equal to or larger than the size of the object . depending on where the object is placed in front of the mirror . let h . and he denote the object height and the image height respectively . the ratio is called magnification . and it is denoted by m . it turns out that m he v h . u m thus . m r . . . . su note that m can be either positive or negative . depending on the nature of the image . if m is positive . h . and he have the same sign . this means that the image is formed on the same side of the principal axis as the object . in other words . the image is erect . if m is negative . the image is inverted
experiments show that the magnitude of magnetic field due to a circular current carrying wire is i directly proportional to the strength of current pass through the wire i . e . . b i . ii inversely proportional to the distance of the point of observation from the straight current carrying wire i . e . . boc . iii directly proportional to the number of turns of the wire i . e . . b oc n .
let x distance of far point of myopic eye . f focal length of concave lens to be used . as the object to be seen is at infinity and its image is to be formed at the far point . therefore . u and v x . distance of far point o from eye lens is taken same as the distance of far point o from concave lens . from from . or f x fo и hence . focal length of concave lens used for correcting the myopic eye is equal to distance of far point of the myopic eye .
case . when the object is placed between focus and centre of curvature object between f and c 
range of vision the distance between the near point and the far point is called range of vision of the eye . within the range of vision . there is one point where object placed are most distinctly visible . the distance of this point . from the eye . is called least distance of distinct vision . for normal eye this least distance is cm .
scattering of light normally . when you switch on a torch . you do not see a beam of light travelling from the torch . similarly . during the day you do not see the path of the sunlight as it illuminates things around you . however . you can see the path of light if there is dust . smoke or other small particles in the air . you might have seen the path of sunlight streaming into a room through a gap in the curtains . you might have also seen it coming down through gaps in trees in the early morning mist . in both cases . the path of the light is visible from different positions . you know that light travels in straight lines . so . for us to see the path of light from different positions . light must be redirected in different directions by the particles in its path . the phenomenon in which a part of the light incident on a particle is redirected in different directions is called scattering of light . when light falls on small particles . a part of it gets scattered in different directions . the rest of the light goes straight through . do the following activity to see for yourself .
 . . tidal energy periodic rise and fall of ocean water level occurring twice in each lunar day are called ocean tides . high tides occur on every new moon day and full moon day that can raise the level of water by a few metres . tides occur due to gravitational forces of the moon and the sun on ocean water . the difference in the levels of ocean water between high tide and low tide results in the ocean tidal energy . a tidal dam or a barrier is constructed and the ocean water during the high tide is trapped by the barrier fig . . this water is then allowed to fall down on water turbine . thereby converting kinetic energy of flowing water into mechanical energy and then to electrical energy .
concave mirror to the axis axis a ray of light parallel principal focus figure .
mathematically . v i or v ri or r this constant r is called electrical resistance or simply resistance of the conductor at a given temperature . it is represented by a symbol r . the graph between v and i is a straight line passing through the origin as shown in figure . ab slope of the straight line cb v v v but r y hence . slope ř or r slope of the straight line
the strength of magnetic field produced by a current carrying solenoid depends on i the number of turns in the solenoid . larger the number of turns in the solenoid . m studygear greater will be the magnetism produced . ii the strength of current in the solenoid . larger the current passed through solenoid . stronger will be the magnetic field produced . iii the nature of core material used in making solenoid . the use of soft iron rod as core in a solenoid produces the strongest magnetism .
sample problem . a student constructed a model of box type solar cooker . he used a transparent plastic sheet to cover the open face of the box . he found that this cooker does not function well . what modification should he make to enhance its efficiency give reason . solution . instead of using a plastic sheet . the student should use a transparent glass sheet to cover the open face of the box . this is because a glass sheet can trap the heat rays of the sun very effectively by producing greenhouse effect . a transparent plastic sheet cannot do that . from sun 
for lens l . co u . c o for lens l . c g l v . c v from lens formula . vuf for lens l . uut for lens for lens l . . . . u . . two thin lenses in contact . . . ii adding equations i and ii o u fi fa . . . iii for the combination . v u f . . . iv hence . from equation ii and iv . or p p p f fi f for a number of thin lenses having very close optical centers . p p p . . . . . pnth or p p th where nth to n p is positive for convex lens and negative for concave lens . then p algebraic sum of power .
correction the image of a distant object i . e . . at infinity is formed in front of the retina of eye suffering from myopia as shown in figure . a as the image of the object lying at infinity is not formed on the retina of the eye . so such object can not be seen clearly by the myopic eye . the far point of such an eye is near to the eye as shown in figure b .
 . new cartesian sign conventions for lenses . we follow sign conventions . similar to the one used for spherical mirrors . we apply the rules for signs of distances . except that all measurements are taken from the optical centre of the lens . the convention is discussed below 
real and virtual images if the reflected rays converge at a point . a real image is formed at that point . if they appear to diverge from a point . a virtual image is formed at that point .
solar constant the energy that the near earth space receives from the sun is about . kilojoules per second per square metre . and this quantity is called the solar constant . we can define the solar constant as follows the amount of solar energy received per second by one square metre area of the near earth space exposed perpendicularly to the rays of the sun at an average distance between the sun and the earth . is called solar constant . thus . the
the alternating current a . c . produced in india has a frequency of hz . that is . the coil is rotated at the rate of revolutions per second . since in revolution of coil . the current reverses its direction times . so in revolutions of coil . the current reverses its direction x times . thus . the a . c . supply in india reverses its direction times in second . another way of saying this is that the alternating current produced in india reverses its direction every second . that is . each terminal of the coil is positive for of a second and negative for the next of a second . this process is repeated again and again with the result that there is actually no positive and negative in an a . c . generator .
biogas is obtained by anaerobic fermentation of animal waste like . animal dung . and plant wastes in the presence of water . the fermentation is carried out by anaerobic bacteria in the presence of water but in the absence of oxygen . the anaerobic bacteria decompose the carbon compounds present in the animal and plant wastes in the form of carbohydrates . proteins and fats into methane gas . some of these bacteria breakdown biomass to sugars . organic acids and other compounds . these are further decomposed by other bacteria to form carbon dioxide and hydrogen . finally . these combine to form methane and water . the scheme of reaction is as under co h ch ho biogas is prepared in biogas plants which use all types of waste biomass like animal dung . sewage . crop residues . vegetable wastes . water hyacinth . poultry droppings . and wastes from agro based industries etc . the two most common biogas plants are i fixed dome type biogas plant ii floating gas holder type biogas plant
alternating current passes through slip rings to the terminals of the generator . in a dc generator . the direction of the current flowing in the external circuit is kept the same by a commutator .
 . the burning of fossil fuels produces acidic gases such as sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides . these acidic gases cause acid rain . the acid rain damages trees and plants crops . etc . . reduces fertility of soil by making it acidic . and poses a danger to aquatic life like fish by making the water of lakes and rivers acidic . acid rain damages buildings by corroding them slowly . the monuments made of marble stone and statues are also damaged by acid rain . the burning of fossil fuels also puts a poisonous gas . carbon monoxide . into air .
thus . ohm s law states that physical conditions remaining same . the electric current flowing through a conductor is directly proportional to the potential difference across the two ends of the conductor . mathematically . voc i or v ir . . . . where r is a constant for the given metallic wire at a given temperature and is called its resistance . it is the property of a conductor to resist the flow of charges through it .
a windmill essentially consists of a structure similar to a large electric fan that is erected at some height on a rigid support fig . .
the electric circuit consisting of a cell . a bulb and an open switch which was drawn in figure b can be represented by drawing a circuit diagram shown in figure b . in the circuit diagram shown in figure b . a bulb has been connected to the two terminals of the cell by copper wires through an open switch .
disadvantage the burning of coal or oil in a thermal power plant causes environmental pollution and global warming .
thus . the resistivity of a material is numerically equal to the resistance of a conductor of this material of unit length and unit cross sectional area . the shape of the cross section is immaterial . in other words . it is defined as the resistance offered by a cube of the material of side of side m when current flows perpendicular to the opposite faces . it is measured in ohm metre m .
ri p fig . . you can repeat the experiment . once for the rays passing through the length of the slab and once . through its height . verify that the lateral shift of the ray is proportional to the thickness of the material of the slab through which the ray passes .
normal incident ray reflected ray angle of incidence angle of reflection plane mirror m point of incidence fig . ray diagram to illustrate the laws of reflection . the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection . mathematically . we have zi zr .
 ii when a source of electricity like a cell or a battery is connected between the ends of the metal wire . then an electric force acts on the electrons present in the wire . since the electrons are negatively charged . they start moving from negative end to the positive end of the wire see figure . this flow of electrons constitutes the electric current in the wire .
we know that the deeper regions of the earth s crust are very hot . this heat melts the rocks . the molten rocks are known as magma . geological changes in some regions push the magma upward . which gets collected at some depth below the surface of the earth . these places . called hot spots . are the source of geothermal energy .
when a number of lenses of different powers are combined . the net power of the combination is the algebraic sum of the individual powers . p pa p p
formation according to modern view . the oil has been produced as a result of bacterial decomposition of plants and animal s fossils which got buried millions of years ago under the earth . the oil in the petroleum field is generally mixed with a gaseous mixture . known as natural gas .
principal axis the line joining the pole and the centre of curvature of the mirror is called the principal axis of the mirror . the line pc extended both ways represents the principal axis of the mirror .
please note that the image formed by a plane mirror can be seen only by looking into the mirror . so . if a screen is placed at position i . no image would be formed on it because the light rays do not actually pass through the point i . they only appear to do so . an image of this type . which cannot be received on a screen . is known as a virtual image . another point to be noted is that the light rays shown by dotted lines behind the mirror are only imaginary light rays . there can be no real light rays behind a mirror because it has a silvered reflecting surface at its back covered with a paint which does not allow light rays to pass
it is used as eye lens in galileo telescope .
plotting compass . the magnetic field lines leave the north pole of a magnet and enter its south pole as shown in figure . in other words . each magnetic field line is directed from the north pole of a magnet to its south pole . each field line indicates . at every point on it . the direction of magnetic force that would act on a north pole if it were placed at that point . the strength of magnetic field is indicated by the degree of closeness of the field lines . where the field lines are closest together . the magnetic field is the strongest . for example . the field lines are closest together at the two poles of the bar magnet . so the magnetic field is the strongest at the poles . please note that no two magnetic field lines are found to cross each other . if two field lines crossed each other . it would mean that at the point of intersection . the compass needle would point in two directions at the same time . which is not possible . it should be noted that we have drawn the magnetic lines
those sources of energy which are being produced continuously in nature and are inexhaustible are called renewable sources of energy . sun is the main source of energy on the earth . the solar energy . harnessed from flowing water . wind . tides . ocean waves . and biogas . are some energy sources that are directly or indirectly derived from the energy provided by the sun . these sources can be utilised as long as the earth continues to receive light and heat of the sun . nuclear energy and geothermal energy are examples of some other sources of energy that are likely to be available for a long time . although these do not relate to the energy of the sun .
the essential parts of the eye are described below i cornea it is a transparent spherical membrane covering the bulge in front of the eyeball . the eyeball is approximately spherical in shape with a diameter of about . cm . light enters the eye through the cornea . the space behind the cornea is filled with a clear liquid called aqueous humour . the cornea and the aqueous humour act as a lens . hence most of the refraction occurs in the cornea because the liquid medium surrounding the lens has an average index of refraction close to that of the lens . the aqueous humour has a refractive index of about . .
focus and focal length of a spherical mirror the point on the principal axis where rays incident parallel to the principal axis converge to or appear to diverge from is called the focus .
 . spherical mirrors a mirror is a reflecting surface . we have already familiarized ourselves with a type of mirror called plane mirror . another variety of mirrors are the curved mirrors . a curved mirror is a mirror with a curved reflecting surface . which may be either convex bulging outward or concave bulging inward . the curved mirrors converge bring together or diverge spread out the rays of light incident on them . the most common type of curved mirrors is the spherical mirror .
in figure . we have an object ab placed in front of a convex mirror m anywhere between pole p and infinity . a ray of light ad . parallel to the principal axis of the convex mirror . strikes the mirror at point d . now . according to the first rule of image formation . this parallel ray of light should appear to be coming from focus f after reflection . so . we join the points d and f by a dotted line and produce the line fd towards the left in the
focal plane principal axis . rente r rretes principal axis door r fig . a principal focus of a concave mirror . b principal focus of a convex mirror .
 if magnetic permeability of solenoid frame is u . then field produced by the solenoid b mol . nl ab un moni monl m end centre r end 
rule . a ray of light going towards the focus of a concave lens . becomes parallel to its principal axis after refraction through the lens . this rule is just the reverse
a component of a given size that offers a low resistance is a good conductor . a conductor having some appreciable resistance is called a resistor . a component of identical size that offers a higher resistance is a poor conductor . an insulator of the same size offers even higher resistance . the resistance can have a wide range of values . the copper wires in a television set . for instance . have a negligibly small resistance . on the other hand . commercial resistors can have resistances up to many kilo ohm k or mega ohm m . such resistors play an important role in electric circuits . where they are used to limit the amount of current and establish certain voltage levels .
table . verification of ohm s law sample reading voltmeter ammeter reading reading volt ampere s . no . r ohm . . . . . . . g a wn . . . . . . . . i d ei primigi vi . . . . . poveri . . . . བཏབཏ ནངབངང བཊས ཧ བན ངང ཝནང ཝཎ བ བ ང བ བ བནང བ བ མ www . imo . se ower concen p current a wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww ཝ ཎ བནས བ བ . ང ངབཝནདཙཝང ཀ . . . . དན ཝད . བ བ potential difference v fig . graph vs v for ohm s law .
since refractive index is a ratio of two similar quantities . therefore . it does not have a unit .
the raindrops behave like tiny prisms . when rays of the sun fall on the rain drops . the rain drops disperse the light and deviate the different colours by refraction and total internal reflection to the eye of the observer fig . . this forms a rainbow . to an observer these light rays appear at the eye at different angles . usually two rainbows are seen simultaneously in the sky . the dark and the smaller one is called the primary rainbow . the faint and bigger one is called the secondary rainbow . in the primary rainbow . the inner arc will be violet and the outer arc will be red . in the secondary rainbow . the inner arc is red and the outer arc is violet .
electric motor electric motor is a rotating device which converts electrical energy into mechanical energy .
activity connect the ends of a coil to a galvanometer . since there is no current in the coil . the needle of the galvanometer will be at the zero mark . now . bring a bar or rod magnet sharply towards the coil figure . a . the galvanometer needle will get deflected in a particular direction figure . b . when the magnet comes to rest . the needle comes back to its zero position . showing that the current in the coil has stopped . now . move the magnet away from the coil . the needle will get deflected again . but this time . in the opposite direction figure . c . this shows that the direction of the current has reversed . you will also find that the direction of the current depends on the pole of the magnet facing the coil while the magnet is moving .
 . to plot the magnetic field pattern due to a bar magnet by using a compass the bar magnet m whose magnetic field pattern is to be traced is placed on a sheet of paper and its boundary is marked with a pencil see figure . a plotting compass is now brought near the n pole of the bar magnet see position x in figure . in this position . the n pole of magnet repels the n pole of compass needle due to which the tip of the compass needle moves away from the n pole of the magnet . on the other hand . the n pole of magnet attracts the s pole of compass needle due to which the tail of compass needle comes near the n pole of the magnet see position x in figure . we mark the positions of the tip and the tail of compass needle by pencil dots b and a . that is . we mark the positions of the two poles of the compass needle by pencil dots b and a tip representing north pole and tail representing south pole .
electric current a free to move positive charge will move from higher to lower potential . a negative charge will move from lower to higher potential .
about . . . years ago . in the carboniferous period . much of the earth s surface was covered with dense forests and swamps . as trees and other plants died and fell . they did not rot away completely . the wet . airless mud made it difficult for decay bacteria to live . so the half rotted trees gradually sank into the mud .
 . aperture the effective width of a lens through which refraction takes place is called the aperture .
the air . thus . we get a spectrum of seven colours . which is known as a rainbow . rainbow is observed during a rainfall or after the rainfall or when we look at a water fountain provided the sun is at the back of the observer .
consider a ray of light travelling from medium into medium as shown in fig . . . let vų be the speed of light in medium and v be the speed of light in medium . the refractive index of medium with respect to medium is given by the ratio of the speed of light in medium to that in medium . this is usually represented by the symbol . this can be expressed in an equation form as n speed of light in medium speed of light in medium v v . . . . where n is the refractive index of medium . in which the refracted ray travels . with respect to medium . in which the incident ray travels . similarly . the refractive index of medium with respect to medium is given by n speed of light in medium speed of light in medium v v . . . . 
 . the burning of fossil fuels produces large amount of carbon dioxide which goes into air . though carbon dioxide gas is not harmful immediately . it damages the environment in the long run . the presence of increasing amounts of carbon dioxide gas in the atmosphere is causing increased greenhouse effect leading to excessive heating of the earth . this is harmful for all the life on earth .
attraction or repulsion in a magnet the magnetic poles exert forces on each other . like poles repel and unlike poles attract each other .
 . . solar energy solar energy has the greatest potential of all the sources of renewable energy . this energy comes to the earth from the sun . this energy keeps the temperature of the earth above that of colder space . causes air currents in the atmosphere in ocean . causes the water cycle and generates photosynthesis in plants . this energy obtained from the sun is called the solar energy . when sunlight falls on any object . it produces heat . this heat can be utilized for many purposes . it is understood that the energy given by the sun to the earth in one day is . times more than the total energy consumed by the world in one year . almost all energy of the earth originates from the sun . some of this energy gets stored in forms which we can use .
sign convention it is a convention which fixes the signs of different distances measured . the sign convention to be formed is the new cartesian sign convention . it gives the following rules . the principal axis of the lens is taken along the x axis of the rectangular coordinate system . and optical centre of the lens is taken as the origin .
 i the rays of light coming from a distant object at infinity are parallel to one another when they reach the eye see figure a . actually . the rays of light given out by the distant object are diverging in the beginning but they become parallel when they reach the eye after travelling a large distance . the parallel rays of light coming from a distant object need a convex eye lens of low converging power to converge them or focus them to form an image on the retina of the eye . the convex eye lens of low converging power is the one having a large focal length and it is quite thin .
using p m . we get . m cm
whose resistivity is little affected by temperature . alloys do not oxidize burn readily at high temperatures . thus . these alloys are used in electric heating devices such as electric irons . toasters . etc . tungsten is used almost for filaments of incandescent lamps . whereas copper and aluminium are generally used for electrical transmission lines .
procurement mining petroleum is obtained by drilling holes in the earth s crust and sinking pipes into it . there are two government agencies which are active in exploration and production of petroleum oil in india . they are i oil and natural gas corporation ongc . ii oil india limited oil .
 . effect of length of the conductor it has been found by experiments that on increasing the length of a wire . its resistance increases and on decreasing the length of the wire . its resistance decreases . actually . the resistance of a conductor is directly proportional to its length . that is . resistance . rol where l is the length of conductor since the resistance of a wire is directly proportional to its length . therefore . when the length of a wire is doubled . its resistance also gets doubled and if the length of a wire is halved . then its resistance also gets halved . when we double the length of a wire . then this can be considered to be equivalent to two resistances joined in series . and their resultant resistance is the sum of the two resistances which is double
 . safety measures from radiation hazards following precautions are observed by the workers engaged in this field i the radioisotopes are transferred in thick walled lead container and are kept in rooms with thick walls of lead . ii the radioisotopes are handled with the help of remote controlled devices . iii the workers are asked to wear lead aprons . iv the radioactive contamination of the work area is avoided at all costs .
do you know during refraction of light . wavelength and velocity of light change but the frequency remains unchanged .
rule . a ray of light passing through the centre of curvature of a concave mirror is reflected back along the same path because it strikes the mirror normally or perpendicularly . this is shown in figure . a ray of light ad is passing through the centre of curvature c of the concave mirror . it falls normally or perpendicularly on the mirror at point d and gets reflected back along the same path da . it should be noted that we have put two arrow heads on the line ad which point in the opposite directions . the arrow pointing from left to right indicates the direction of incident ray and the arrow pointing from right to left indicates the direction of reflected ray see figure . the ray of light passing through the centre of curvature of a concave mirror is reflected back along the same path because it strikes the concave mirror at right angles to its surface due to which the angle of incidence and angle of reflection both are .
 . . far point . near point and the least distance of distinct vision i far point the farthest point upto which a short sighted eye can see clearly is called the far point of the eye . for a normal eye . the far point is infinity .
some of the advantages of using geothermal energy are as follows it is economical to use geothermal energy . this is because the cost of electricity produced by using geothermal energy is almost half of that produced from conventional energy sources . another advantage is that the use of geothermal energy does not cause any pollution . so . it is a clean and environment friendly source of energy . some of the disadvantages of geothermal energy are as follows geothermal energy is not available everywhere . it is available only in those areas where there are hot rocks near the earth s surface . another disadvantage is that deep drilling in the earth to obtain geothermal energy is technically very difficult and expensive .
lens and get refracted or bent according to the laws of refraction . all the rays . after passing through the convex lens . converge at the same point f on the other side right side of the lens . the point f is called principal focus or just focus of the convex lens . we can now say that the principal focus of a convex lens is a point on its principal axis to which light rays parallel to the principal axis converge after passing through the lens . in figure . point f is the principal focus for the light rays coming from the left side . if the incident light rays fall on the convex lens from the right hand side . they will converge to a point f on the left side of the lens . thus . f is the second focus of the convex lens . from this discussion we conclude that a te lens has two foci . the two foci of a lens are at equal
from point a . thus . a b is the complete image of object ab . when our eye looks into the lens from the right side . it appears as if the light rays are coming from a and b instead of a and b . thus . a b is the virtual image . it is erect . larger than the object and can be seen only by looking through the lens . it is formed on the same side of the lens as the object . from the above discussion we conclude that when the object is placed within the focus of a convex lens . the image formed is i behind the object on the left side of lens . ii virtual and erect . and iii larger than the object enlarged or magnified .
box type solar cooker a solar cooker is a device that uses solar energy for cooking . in its simplest form it consists of a special box in which the food to be cooked is placed . the box is made of an insulating material such as plastic or wood . the box may be double walled . with an insulating material even air between the outer and inner walls . this reduces heat loss due to conduction more effectively . the inner walls are painted black to increase heat absorption . the box is covered with a glass sheet . this reduces heat loss by radiation and traps heat . which increases the temperature inside the box . the covered box is made airtight to reduce heat loss by convection . to increase the amount of sunlight going into the box . a plane mirror is hinged at an angle at the top of the box .
when the above expressions are combined . then the expression obtained for the magnetic field due to a circular current carrying conductor is b kn where i is the current through the conductor . r is the radius of the circular current carrying wire and n is the number of turns in the circular coil . here . k is a constant about which you will study in higher classes . the current i is measured in ampere a and the radius r is measured in metre m .
illustrations aconcave mirror produces four times magnified image of an object placed at cm from it . find the position of the image . ans . here . u cm sign convention m . but m or lu u v u cm cm . thus . image of the object is at cm from the pole of the mirror and behind the mirror .
 viii aperture the size of the mirror is called its aperture . it is also defined as the effective diameter . of the light reflecting area of the mirror . fig . 
magnetism in human beings extremely weak electric currents are produced in the human body by the movement of charged particles called ions . these are called ionic currents . now . we have studied that whenever there is an electric current . a magnetic field is produced . so . when the weak ionic currents flow along the nerve cells . they produce magnetic field in our body . for example . when we try to touch something with our hand . our nerves carry electric impulse to the appropriate muscles . and this electric impulse creates a temporary magnetism in the body . the magnetism produced in the human body is very . very weak as compared to the earth s magnetism . the two main organs of the human body where the magnetic field produced is quite significant are the heart and the brain .
object at focus real object ab has its image formed at infinity . the image is real and . inverted refracted rays go downward and must have very large size . parallel rays to infinity convex lens object at focus . image at infinity
main switch beyond the main fuse . the live and the neutral wires are connected to the main switch . it is a double pole switch and has an iron covering . the covering of the main switch is also locally earthed . the switch can cut off the live and the neutral wires from the household circuit by operating a single liver .
thus . if we join two resistances of ohms and ohms in series . then their combined resistance or resultant resistance will be ohms which is equal to the sum of the individual resistances . before we derive the formula for the resultant resistance of a number of resistances connected in series . we should keep in mind that i when a number of resistances connected in series are joined to the terminals of a battery . then each resistance has a different potential difference across its ends which depends on the value of resistance . but the total potential difference across the ends of all the resistances in series is equal to the voltage of the battery . thus . when a number of resistances are connected in series . then the sum of the potential differences across all the resistances is equal to the voltage of the battery applied ii when a number of resistances are connected in series . then the same current flows through each resistance which is equal to the current flowing in the whole circuit .
the image is virtual . erect same side up as the object . because both the object and image have arrow head at the top . and of the same size as the object . please note that in figure . the image a b has been drawn by dotted line just to show that it is a virtual image . thus . the nature of image formed by a plane mirror is virtual and erect . and the size of image formed by a plane mirror is equal to that of the object . the image is at the same distance behind the plane mirror as the object arrow is in front of the mirror .
numerical problems based on convex lenses we will now solve some numerical problems based on convex lenses by using the lens formula and the magnification formulae . here are some examples .
construction it consists of an insulated wooden
wy wire bulb lights up electric current copper connecting positive negative terminal terminal cell figure . the potential difference between the two terminals of this cell causes elec tric current to flow through copper wires and the bulb .
formation of image in a plane mirror consider a small object o say . a point source of light placed in front of a plane mirror mm see figure . the mirror will form an image i of the object o . now . we want to know how this image has
different cases . are as given with their ray diagrams . object at infinity . a point object lying on the principal axis rays come parallel to the principal axis and after refraction from the lens . actually meet at the second principal focus f . the image is formed at focus f . it is real and point sized . convex lens point object at infinity . image at focus
your back . from where does a rainbow get its colours the colours come from the dispersion of white light by raindrops suspended in the air . sunlight entering a drop gets refracted and is split into its component colours . the lights of the component colours travel through the drop and fall on its other side . a part of these lights get reflected . and a part goes out . this is not total internal reflection . the reflected lights again fall on the surface of the drop and get refracted on the way out . the two refractions bend the lights through a large angle . keeping them separate . the lights of different colours emerging from the raindrops create a rainbow . with red at the top and violet at the bottom .
glass prism a pin hole white screen white light
do you the direction of magnetic field is from north pole to south pole outside the magnet and from south pole to north pole inside the magnet . know
dissolve about g of sodium thiosulphate hypo in about l of clean water taken in the tank . add about to ml of concentrated sulphuric acid to the water . what do you observe 
 w bulb nichrome wire torch bulb electric circuit to study the resistance offered by different resistors assos
a fusion process is just the opposite of fission process . the energy produced in nuclear fusion reaction is . however . much more than that produced in a nuclear fission reaction . the energy produced during nuclear fusion has not been controlled so far . so . nuclear fusion energy could not be used for generating electricity so far . please note that the nuclear reactions which occur at extremely high temperatures are called thermonuclear reactions . before we describe a hydrogen bomb . please note that the hydrogen isotope of mass number is called tritium .
wind energy moving air is called wind . wind has energy . the energy possessed by wind is due to its high speed or motion . so . the wind possesses kinetic energy . it is this kinetic energy of wind which is utilised for doing work . solar energy or sun s energy is responsible for the blowing of wind . wind blows due to the uneven heating of earth by the sun in different regions . so . wind energy comes from the sun in an indirect way .
before we describe the wiring of our rooms . it is very important to note here that alongwith the live wire and the neutral wire . a third wire called earth wire also goes into our rooms . in figure . the earth wire e has been shown by dotted line . one end of the earth wire e is connected to a copper plate and buried deep under the earth near the house as shown in figure or at the nearest electric sub station . the earth connection is first made to the electric meter and then to the main switch . this earth wire then goes into our room alongwith the live wire and the neutral wire . please note that the earth wire up to the main switch of our house is usually an uncovered . thick copper wire having no plastic insulation over it . but the earth wire which goes from the main switch into our rooms is a copper wire having green insulation covering over it . thus . in order to distinguish between the live wire . neutral wire and earth wire . the wire having red plastic covering is made live wire . the wire having black plastic covering is made neutral wire . and the wire having green plastic covering is made earth wire .
you know that current flows from the positive to the negative terminal of a battery . also . the direction of the field of a magnet is from the north to the south pole . so . based on your observations in the activity . you can say that the following are true for a current carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field . a a current carrying conductor experiences a force in a magnetic field . b the direction of the force depends on the direction of the magnetic field and is perpendicular to it . c the direction of the force depends on the direction of the current and is perpendicular to it .
 . . solar cooker a solar cooker is a device used to cook food by utilising the energy of the sun . the food that we cook includes normal cooking of rice and cereals or deep frying . baking and roasting . therefore . we shall discuss two types of solar cookers . one using a plane mirror as a reflector . which is used for normal cooking . and the other using a spherical mirror as a reflector . which is used for deep frying and roasting . figure . shows a solar cooker using a plane mirror as a reflector of sun rays .
 to determine the focal length of a convex lens quickly but approximately when the object is at infinity . the distance of image from the lens will be equal to the focal length of the lens . this fact is used to find out the focal length of a convex lens quickly but approximately . let us see how this is done .
activity let us trace the path of a ray of light through a transparent glass slab . fix a sheet of white paper on a board . place the slab at its middle figure . . draw the boundary of the slab . and then draw a line rp to meet one of the longer boundaries at p . at an angle . fix two pins a . b vertically on this line about cm apart . look at the image of the pins from the other side of the slab . now fix a pin c such that it appears to be in a straight line with the images of a and b . fix another pin d at least cm from c such that all four pins appear to be in a straight line . remove the pins and join by a straight line the points where the pins c and d were inserted . extend this line to meet the boundary of the slab at q . join pq . the lines rp . pq and qd represent the directions of the incident ray . the refracted ray within the slab and the emergent ray after the second refraction respectively . you will find that the qd is parallel to rp . also . it is shifted sideways from the direction of rp . note that the incident ray bent towards the normal at p . as it moved from the optically rarer medium air to the optically denser medium glass . at q . the ray going from the optically denser medium glass to the optically rarer medium air . bent away from the normal at q .
this also makes the light from the star to increase or decrease in intensity . since the stars are very distant . they approximate point sized sources of light . this makes the star sometimes to appear brighter and sometimes dimmer . the light coming from the stars . therefore . presents a quivering shaking appearance . thus giving the impression as if the stars are twinkling .
 ii medium a substance through which light propagates or tends to propagate is called a medium . it is of following three kinds a transparent it is a medium through which light can be propagated easily . e . g . . glass . water . etc . b translucent it is a medium through which light is propagated partially . e . g . . paper . ground . glass . etc . c opaque it is a medium through which light cannot be propagated . e . g . . wood . iron . etc .
 . electromagnet an electromagnet is a coil of wire wound around a soft iron core . it behaves as a permanent magnet except that it can be turned off . it is a temporary magnet . it begins to behave as a magnet when an electric current is passed through it . it usually contains a soft iron core . the purpose of the core is to increase the intensity
a dam or water reservoir is made over a river . the energy of stored water in the dam is potential energy . the water in a dam is allowed to fall on the water wheel or turbine . as a result of this . the turbine rotates whose axle is connected with the armature of the
hypermetropia can be corrected with converging or convex lens .
 the apparent depth of an object at the bottom of tank filled with a liquid of refractive index . is . cm . what is the actual depth of the liquid in the tank ans . refractive index . real depth u apparent depth real depth . . . hence . real depth . x . cm . cm .
solar cells is called a solar panel . the solar cells in a solar panel are connected in such a way that the total potential difference and the total capacity to provide electric current become large . uses of solar panels the advantage of solar panels is more in areas where the usual energy sources are not available . that is why they are used as the source of electric power in satellites . solar panels have also been used in unmanned aircraft that fly at high altitudes for long periods . conducting scientific experiments . experimental solar powered cars have also been made . in many parts of india . solar panels are being used to charge rechargeable batteries during the day . at night . these batteries provide electric power for lighting . etc . they are also being used for operating traffic lights . water pumps . telephones . tv sets and radio receivers .
in case the magnet is moved faster with velocity o instead of v either towards or away from the coil . the deflection in the galvanometer increases .
when the object is beyond f . appears to be formed between f and c . virtual . erect and smaller than the object on the same side as the object . f l f bf f b a
the new cartesian sign convention for mirrors is shown in figure . the object is always placed on the left side of the mirror as shown in figure so that the direction of incident light is from
in parallel combination . the equivalent resistance is given by rp by riz rz in parallel combination of resistors . the equivalent resistance is less than the least value of resistance in the combination . in parallel combination of resistors . the potential difference is same across all the resistors .
 iii time period t of ac source ii is . s . s . s . thus . the frequency l of ac . i . e . . v hz t . s iv a the magnitude of dc remains constant whereas that of ac keeps on changing with time . b the direction of dc remains the same whereas that of ac keeps on changing with time . c the frequency of dc is zero whereas the frequency of ac is hz in india .
the function of carbon brushes is to make contact with the rotating rings of the commutator and through them to supply current to the coil . it should be noted that any one brush touches only one ring at a time . so that when the coil rotates . the two brushes will touch both the rings one by one .
differences between real and virtual images
thumb points in the direction of current fiow fingers point in direction of current carrying magnetic field wire a current current direction of magnetic field fig . a the right hand thumb palm rule for determining the direction of the magnetic field due to a straight conductor . note that the magnetic field forms circles around the wire . b maxwell s cork screw rule . 
energy of ocean waves definition due to blowing of wind on the surface of ocean . waves are produced on the water surface . these waves are called ocean waves sea waves or water waves .
the potential difference is measured by means of an instrument called the voltmeter . the voltmeter is always connected in parallel across the points between which the potential difference is to be measured . while connecting a voltmeter in a circuit . its ve terminal should be connected to the ve terminal of the battery and its ve terminal to the ve terminal of the battery .
geothermal energy is the heat energy present in the hot rocks inside the earth .
neutral neutral live live ground ground 吳群雄御敌冠带的理论的企业站地供佛前世能独特 地前带带带带带 e o r s n ring main circuit three the ring main circuit . fig . the ring system of wiring .
when the coin is under water . then the rays oa and ob coming from the coin travel in water in straight line paths until they reach the surface of water . when the rays of light oa and ob travelling in water . go out into air . they get refracted they change their directions . the ray of light oa gets refracted at point a . bends away from the normal . and goes in the direction ax see figure b . similarly . the ray of light ob gets refracted at point b . bends away from the normal . and goes in the direction by .
prism and after refraction in the prism the light fell on the opposite wall of the room . instead of white light there was a set of coloured lights red at the top . then orange . yellow . green . blue . indigo and violet at the lower edge . thus . a spectrum of seven colours abbreviated as vibgyor is produced from white light . of course there was overlapping of colours .
position of image at the principal focus or in the focal plane between f and f at f beyond f at infinity on the same side as that of object
reflector r is also attached with the box at a certain angle . the food to be cooked is placed in metal containers also painted black from outside . when the food is to be cooked . it is placed inside the container the box is covered with the glass sheet and is placed in the sun with the reflector inclined at an angle such that a high beam of sun rays falls inside the box .
 . a stick partly immersed in water appears to be bent at the water surface when a straight stick is partly immersed in water and held obliquely to the surface . it appears to be bent at the point where it enters water see figure . this apparent bending of the stick is due to the
the potential difference to be applied between the terminals of the device is also mentioned . the standard voltage pd for home appliances is v under the british system which we follow here in india . in the usa . it is v . but quite often we have low voltage due to shortage of electrical energy . a bulb marked
an electric appliance consumes the specified power w only if it runs at the specified voltage . if the applied voltage is greater than the specified voltage of the appliance . the appliance will get damaged . similarly . if the appliance is made to run at a lower voltage its power consumption decreases .
incident ray the ray of light which strikes the reflecting surface at the point of incidence is called the incident ray .
is converted into light . so . filament type electric bulbs are not power efficient . on the other hand . tube lights are much more power efficient . because they have no filaments .
geothermal energy . brought to the surface by natural geysers . is also utilised for generating electricity .
compared to coal and nuclear plants the average geothermal plant requires very little land . while coal and nuclear plants need huge acreage to supply their fuel . an entire geothermal field uses only between one and eight acres per megawatt compared to five to ten acres mw for nuclear and nineteen acres mw for coal .
 l iv temperature with rise in temperature . the resistance of metals increases . and decreases with decrease in temperature . but there are certain alloys like nichrome . magnanin . whose resistance vary negligibly with temperature .
xd d x f vu f x . d xd x d as x d . f is positive . therefore . correcting lens must be convex .
as seen from the table the resistivity of alloys is higher than the resistivity of the metals from which they are formed . also . the resistivity of alloys increases with rise in temperature . but this increase is much smaller as compared to pure metals . there are certain alloys such as manganin cu . mn . ni . constantan cu . ni and nichrome ni . cr . mn . fe 
air air e know that light travels in a straight line path . this is true as long as light rays are travelling in the same medium or same substance having the same density throughout . if . however . the light rays are made to go from one medium to another . the light ray of rays change their direction or bend at the boundary between the two media . light for example . when a ray of light travelling in air goes obliquely into another sa medium glass . it changes the direction or bends on entering the glass block see figure . the change in direction of ray of light or bending of ray of glass light occurs again when it goes out from glass into air see figure . the block change in direction of light when it passes from one medium to another obliquely . is called refraction of light . in other words . the bending of light when it goes from one medium to another obliquely is called refraction of light . the refraction of light takes place when light rays enter from air into figure . the ray of light changes glass or from glass into air . the refraction of light takes place when light enters direction or refracts at point a from air into water or from water into air . and the refraction of light also when it goes from air into glass . takes place when light enters from water into glass or from glass into water . the ray of light changes direction the optical instruments like camera . microscope . and telescope work on the orreir a microscope and telescope work on the or refracts again at point b when refraction of light through glass lenses . we will now understand the refraction it goes from glass into air . of light more clearly with the help of a diagram .
the natural magnets are the one . which occur naturally in nature . e . g . . lodestone .
 . rules to determine the direction of magnetic field around a current carrying conductor i right hand thumb rule or palm rule the right hand thumb rule or palm rule gives the direction of magnetic field due to a straight current carrying conductor . according to the rule grasp the conductor in the right hand with the thumb pointing in the direction of current . and then the direction in which the fingers curl gives the direction of the magnetic field . 
please note that no matter where the object is placed in front of a concave lens . the concave lens always forms a virtual . erect and diminished image of the object . when the distance of an object from a concave lens is changed .
the underground water in contact with the hot spots turns into steam . since this steam is trapped between rocks . it gets compressed to high pressure . this steam is extracted by sinking pipes through holes drilled up to hot spots . the steam comes up at high pressure . which can be utilised to turn the turbine of electric generator . in some places . the steam and hot water from hot spots may come to the surface without drilling holes . this happens if water could find its way through large cracks between rocks . hot water and steam gushes out with very high pressure from the surface that forms natural geysers . geothermal energy . brought to the surface by natural geysers . is also utilised for generating electricity . geothermal plants need several wells . drilling these wells does have an impact on the land but processes like advanced directional or slant drilling lessens that impact . many wells can be drilled from one pad . which minimises the amount of land needed for things like fluid piping and
the two reflected rays ax and by are diverging moving away from one another . so they cannot meet on the left side . let us produce the reflected rays ax and by backwards as shown by dotted lines in figure . they meet at point i behind the mirror . now . when the reflected rays ax and by enter the eye of a person at position e . the eye sees the rays of light in
 another term that we will be using is the normal . the normal is a line at right angle to the mirror surface at the point of incidence . in other words . normal is a line which is perpendicular to the mirror at the point of incidence . in figure . the mirror is mm and the point of incidence is o . so . the line on is the normal to the mirror surface at point o . the normal has been represented by a dotted line to distinguish it from the incident ray and the reflected ray . please note that normal is just a perpendicular line to the mirror . and it should not be called the normal ray like the incident ray or reflected ray . the normal is a line at right angles to the mirror surface . in other words . normal makes an angle of with the surface of the plane mirror . we will now discuss the angle of incidence and the angle of reflection .
there are a number of ways a magnetic field can be used to generate an electric current figure . illustrates one of them . this figure shows a bar magnet and a helical coil of wire to which a galvanometer is connected . when there is no relative motion between the bar magnet and the coil . as in part a of the figure . the galvanometer reads zero . indicating there is no current . however . when the magnet moves toward the coil . as in part b a current appears in the coil . as the magnet approaches . the magnetic field that it creates at the location of the coil becomes stronger and stronger . and it is this changing magnetic field that produces the current . when the magnet moves away from the coil . as in part c . a current also exists . but the direction of the current is reversed . now . the magnetic field at the coil becomes weaker as the magnet moves away . once again . it is the changing magnetic field at the coil that generates the current .
what is a good source of energy whenever work has to be done . energy is needed . this energy is supplied by a source of energy . different sources of energy are used depending on the type of work to be done . some sources of energy may be good whereas others may not be so good . we can find out whether a given source of energy is good or not by making use of the following characteristics or qualities of a good source of energy . a good source of energy is one i which would do a large amount of work per unit mass or per unit volume . ii which is cheap and easily available . iii which is easy to store and transport .
magnetic poles always exist in pairs the pole of a magnet cannot be separated . if a bar magnet is cut into two pieces each piece will behaves as a complete magnet having a north and a south pole .
 ii after the armature has turned through . it occupies the position shown in figure b . with the armature rotating in the same direction i . e . . anticlockwise . bc moves inwards and ad moves outwards . thus . again applying fleming s right hand rule . we find the induced current in the external circuit r and g flows in the opposite direction due to which the direction of deflection in the galvanometer is towards left . thus . we see that the direction of induced current changes in external circuit after every half revolution of the armature . i . e . . after the armature has turned through an angle of from its initial position . hence . the induced current is alternating in nature . magnitude of induced emf in a generator can be increased by a increasing the number of turns of its armature . b increasing area of the armature c increasing speed of rotation of the armature and d increasing the strength of the magnetic field .
distances from the optical centre . one on either side of the lens the word foci is the plural form of focus . the two foci of a lens are usually denoted by the letters f and f . since all the light rays actually pass through the focus of a convex lens . therefore . a convex lens has real focus .
mu mass of one c atom amu . x kg . x kg mass of an electron m . . amu . x ka mass of a proton mg . amu . x kg mass of a neutron mn . amu . x kg mass of a hydrogen atom my mp me . amu
uses of biogas biogas is used for cooking . lighting . pumping out underground water for irrigation and to generate electricity .
nuclear radiations cause two types of ill effects i somatic and ii genetic . genetic effects are more dangerous than somatic effects .
differences between concave and convex mirrors
light scattere esse pavelles figure . a . now . put a drop of milk in the water and shine light through the water . you will be able to see the path of the light through the water figure . b . in this activity . the scattering of light by particles of milk in its path enables you to see the path of the light . you are able to see the path because light from each point on it reaches your eyes . you will notice that the path of the light is remaining light particle incident light visible from different positions around the glass . this means that milk particles send a part of the light in all directions . the rest of the light keeps moving in the original direction . making the spot of light on the screen . fig . . the scattering of light by a particle
fig . the magnetic field becomes weaker as the distance r of point of observation from the conductor increases .
 . the burning of fossil fuels especially coal produces smoke which pollutes the air .
case . when the object is placed at the focus of a convex lens object at f 
sun appears oval flattened at sunset and sunrise but appears circular at noon at sunset and sunrise . the sun is near the horizon . the rays of light from the upper and lower edge of the sun bend unequally while traveling through the atmosphere . as a result of this phenomenon . the sun appears oval or flattened .
uses of coal . coal is used as a fuel for heating purposes in homes and in industry . . coal is used as a fuel in thermal power plants for generating electricity . . coal is used to make coke . and this coke is then used as a reducing agent in the extraction of metals . mystudygear . coal is used in the manufacture of fuel gases like coal gas . dwo . coal is used in the manufacture of petrol and synthetic natural gas .
advantages solar cookers are inexpensive to own and operate . you can put food in several vessels inside the cooker so that they get cooked simultaneously . these cookers reduce firewood and lpg consumption . and they do not produce any smoke . disadvantages a solar cooker can be used only during daytime . they can be used effectively only in regions with warm climate . they take a long time to cook food in winters and on cloudy days . you cannot use box type cookers to fry food or make roti .
 . a good source of energy the energy required to use a fuel is called the input . when the fuel is used the energy it provides is called the output . the difference between the output
 n to one room nto other room live neutral distribution board electricity electricity board s fuse meter wl n neutral . earth wire e earth . oss socket yang socket outlet report as bulb an tree system of distribution of power
 . to demonstrate electromagnetic induction by using a coil and a bar magnet in figure a . we have a fixed coil of wire ab . the two ends of the coil are connected to a current detecting instrument called galvanometer . now . when a bar magnet is held standstill inside the hollow coil of wire . then there is no deflection in the galvanometer pointer showing that no electric current is produced in the coil of wire when the magnet is held stationary in it .
inversion will become clear from the following example . suppose we have a placard having the word red written on it see figure a . when we hold this placard in front of a plane mirror . the image of word red appears to be like a see figure b . please note that the object placard has the letter r on its left side but the image has this letter in reversed form i on its right side . similarly . the image of letter e appears to be reversed like . and the letter d on the right side of the object placard is on the left side of the image in the reversed form as a . thus . all the letters written on the placard are reversed from left to right . we say that the image is laterally inverted . this is an example of lateral inversion . the phenomenon of lateral inversion is due to the reflection of light .
defects of vision and their correction sometimes . the eye may gradually lose its power of accommodation . in such conditions . the person cannot see the objects distinctly and comfortably . the vision becomes blurred due to the refractive defects of the eye .
coro hans christian oersted . fig . e
 li all the angles are measured with the normal normal drawn to the surface . iray rrayi incident ray . reflected ray and normal are to be lii in the same plane . the angle of incidence i angle of reflection r if the incident ray falls normally i then . reflected ray retraces its path r on reflection frequency . speed do not change . intensity . amplitude change decreases . for the same incident ray . if the mirror is rotated by an angle o . the reflected ray rotates by an angle to see his full image in a plane mirror . a person required a mirror of at least half of his height . .
coal is put to the following uses i coal is used as a fuel in household and industries . ii coal is used to manufacture coal gas which is again an important fuel for industries . coal gas contains hydrogen . methane and carbon monoxide . iii coal is used to prepare synthetic petrol and synthetic natural gas . iv coal is used to make coal tar which is an important source of compound like benzene . toluene . phenol . aniline and naphthalene . v coal is used to make coke .
magnification the quantity he h . is called magnification . its magnitude indicates how many times is the size of the image as compared to that of the object . and its sign indicates whether it is erect or inverted . positive sign indicates an erect image and negative sign . an inverted image .
in this way . the secondary neutrons formed during fission further cause fission and thus set up chain reaction releasing huge amount of energy .
 . . myopia a person suffering from myopia or short sightedness can see nearby objects clearly but cannot see the far away objects clearly . in this defect . the far point does not lie at infinity .
colour of the sky on a clear . sunny day . the sky looks blue . sunlight travelling through the atmosphere is scattered by the molecules of gases in the air . water droplets . dust particles . and so on . of these . the smaller ones like gas molecules scatter more of the bluish lights . when the scattered light reaches our eyes . it makes the sky look blue . air pollution over cities causes large particles to be present in the air above them . compared to small particles . these particles scatter lights of other colours better . thus the scattered light has blue as well as some other components . so . the skies over cities look less blue than over open countryside . in space . there are no particles . so . when astronauts look away from the sun . they only see darkness . this is because there is nothing to scatter sunlight . so . no light gets turned towards their eyes .
 e at f at infinity real . infinitely large . inverted woe
applications of scattering of light
downwards ve mirror fig . the new cartesian sign convention for spherical mirrors . the mirror formula is a relation between the object distance u . the image distance v and the focal length f of a mirror . according to this formula . the three are related as . u v f to motom 
 iii the length of air gap between its poles . if we reduce the length of air gap between the poles of an electromagnet . then its strength increases . for example . the air gap between the poles of a straight . bar type electromagnet is quite large . so a bar type electromagnet is not very strong . on the other hand . the air gap between the poles of a u shaped electromagnet is small . so it is a very strong electromagnet see figure .
you might have noted that the sun looks oval at sunrise and sunset . as you can see from the figure . the rays from the lower regions of the sun travel a greater distance through the atmosphere than those from the upper regions . so . they bend more . as a result . the image of the lower region gets shifted upwards more than that of the upper region . this makes the sun appear like a flattened circle . or an oval .
table . images formed by concave mirrors object position at infinity image position at the focus f b nature of image real and point sized at infinity
 . . . uses of biogas as said earlier . biogas is a very important source of energy and is being used for the following . biogas is used for cooking food . . biogas is used to run engines . . biogas is being used for street lighting .
illustrations an object is placed at a distance of . cm from a concave mirror of focal length . cm . at what distance from the mirror . should a screen be placed to get the sharp image ans . here . f . cm sign convention u . cm determination of the position of image . m . . using we get u vf v fu or lo il or v cm hu
applications of mirrors uses of plane mirrors plane mirrors are generally used as a looking glass in daily life . in optical instruments such as periscope . kaleidoscope . etc . . plane mirrors are used as reflectors . plane mirrors are also used at the blind turns on the road to guide drivers .
if we move the wire ab up and down continuously between the poles of the horse shoe magnet . then a continuous electric current will be produced in the wire . but the direction of this electric current will change rapidly as the direction of movement of the wire changes . this is because when the wire moves up . then the current in it will flow in one direction but when the wire moves down . then the current in it will flow in opposite direction . we will see the pointer of galvanometer move to and fro rapidly as the current in the wire changes direction of flow continuously . the electric current produced in the wire which changes direction continuously is called alternating current or a . c .
on pressing the switch . a current flows in the wire ab in the vertically downward direction . the wire ab is kicked in the forward direction towards south and its lower end b reaches the position b . so that the wire comes to the new position ab as shown by dotted line in figure . when the lower end b of the hanging wire comes forward to b . its contact with the mercury surface is broken due to which the circuit breaks and current stops flowing in the wire ab . since no current flows in the wire . no force acts on the wire in this position and it falls back to its original position . as soon as the wire falls back . its lower end again touches the mercury surface . current starts flowing in the wire and it is kicked
you know that light travels at . . m s in vacuum . this speed is often taken approximately as . . m s . i . e . . . km s . the speed of light in a transparent medium such as glass . water or clear plastic is less than this . the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum to the speed of light in a medium is called the refractive index of the medium . this ratio is denoted by n or u . thus . refractive index n . . . . here . c the speed of light in vacuum and v the speed of light in the medium . in all material media the speed of light is less than c . hence . the refractive index of a material medium is greater than see table . . the speed of light in air at atmospheric pressure is very close to that in vacuum . and we generally take the refractive index of air as the actual value is about . . the refractive index of water is about . . and that of ordinary glass and diamond are about . and . respectively . larger the refractive index of a medium . greater is the bending of light when it enters the medium from air obliquely . thus light bends more when it enters a diamond than when it enters an imitation jewel made of glass . table . refractive indices . water kerosene benzene crown glass carbon disulphide flint glass diamond . . . . . . 
which the two surfaces c and d are concave or bent inward . figure a shows the side view of a convex lens . when we look at a convex lens from the front side . it looks like a piece of transparent spherical glass round glass having a bulge in the middle see figure a . we can feel the bulge in the middle of the convex lens by touching it . similarly . figure b shows the side view of a concave lens . when we look at a concave lens from the front side . it looks like a piece of transparent spherical glass round glass having a depression in the middle see figure b . we can feel the depression in the middle of a concave lens by touching it .
solar cooker a solar cooker is a solar heating device by which solar energy is directly harnessed . it works on the phenomenon of thermal conversion . it is used for cooking food . there are two types of solar cookers namely box type solar cooker concentrator type solar cooker
in order to calculate the power of a lens . we need its focal length in metres . in many problems . the focal length of a lens is usually given to us in centimetres . so . to calculate the power of such a lens . we should first convert the focal length of the lens into metres by dividing the given centimetre value by . if . however . the focal length is already in metres . then there is no need to change it . we will now solve some problems based on the calculation of power of lenses .
if we extend the refracted rays ax and by backwards to the left side . then a virtual image of the coin is formed at point i . nearer to the surface of water see figure b . the refracted rays ax and by . which appear to be coming from the virtual image of the coin can enter our eye at position e due to which the coin becomes visible to us . thus . when the coin is under water then due to refraction of light . a virtual image of the coin is formed nearer to the water surface . and since the virtual image of coin which we see . is nearer to the water surface . so the coin appears to rise on adding water in the basin . thus . it is due to the refraction of light that a coin placed at the bottom of a container appears to rise as the container is slowly filled with water .
according to the above classification . wood obtained by the cutting of trees is a renewable source of energy . now . a newly planted sapling usually takes more than years to grow and mature into a tree . so . replenishment of cut down trees takes a very long time . another disadvantage is that the cutting down of trees on a large scale for obtaining wood causes depletion of the forests leading to an imbalance on of the forests leading to an imbalance in nature . due to these reasons . using wood as a source of energy is not a wise decision even though it is a renewable source of energy .
ssordosor nondon source of light source of light bonorogoro bonorodnossos field of view of a convex mirror field of view of a plane mirror fig . field view of a a convex mirror and b plane mirror .
the energy of flowing water is called hydroenergy . the energy of flowing water or hydroenergy is in fact an indirect source of solar energy . this is because it is the solar energy which recirculates water in
the end pointing towards the geographical north is called north pole and other end pointing towards the geographical south is called south pole .
actual flow of electrons which constitute the current is . however . from negative terminal to positive terminal of a cell . which is opposite to the direction of conventional current .
 i a concave mirror is that spherical mirror in which the reflection of light takes place at the concave surface or bent in surface . a concave mirror is shown in figure a . in which the concave reflecting surface has been marked a . the other surface b in figure a . having short . oblique lines is the non reflecting surface . the inner shining surface of a steel spoon is an example of concave mirror see figure . in our ray diagrams . we use only the side view of a concave mirror as shown in figure a . if . however .
from the pole p to its principal focus f . thus . in figure . the distance pf is the focal length of the convex mirror .
 . dispersion of white light by a glass prism it was in that sir isaac newton experimenting with sunlight and glass prism discovered that . white light from the sun was composed of many colours . a diagram of newton s prism experiment is shown in fig . . he made a small circular opening in the window of a darkened room and placed a prism near the hole in such a way that light was incident on one face of the screen with hole white screen equilateral triangle or dispersing prism
an important discussion a normal eye can see the distant objects as well as the nearby objects clearly due to its power of accommodation . before we discuss the power of accommodation of the eye . we should know the difference between the distant objects and nearby objects from the point of view of light rays received from them . this is described below .
construction of the eye the front part of the eye is called cornea . it is made of a transparent substance and it is bulging outwards . the outer surface of cornea is convex in shape . the light coming from objects enters the eye through cornea . just behind the cornea is the iris or coloured diaphragm . iris is a flat . coloured . ring shaped membrane behind the cornea of the eye . there is a hole in the middle of the iris which is called pupil of the eye . thus . pupil is a hole in the middle of the iris . the pupil appears black because no light is reflected from it .
refracting edge refraction angle refraction angle refracting surface refracting surface base fig . a prism . a angle of prism n m . angle of deviation incident is ray e emergent ray fig . tracing the course of rays through a prism .
suppose we have a convex lens of cm focal length . then its focus f will be at a distance of cm from it . so . by saying that the object is between f and f from this convex lens . we will mean that the object is between cm and x cm from the convex lens on its left side . and by saying that the image is formed beyond f on the other side . we mean that the image is formed at a distance of more than cm from convex lens on its right side .
 i let us suppose that the armature abcd is rotating anticlockwise so that the arm ad moves inward and bc moves outwards . applying fleming s right hand rule . we find that the induced current flows in the circuit as a shown in figure a due to which g shows deflection towards the right .
magnetic field lines are plotted with the help of a magnetic compass a small magnetic needle pivoted at its centre . the magnetic field lines around a bar magnet are not uniform . thus . a bar magnet does not possess a uniform magnetic field .
see the actual bottom of the pool . we see a virtual image of the bottom of the pool which is formed by the refraction of light coming from the pool water into the air . and since the image of the bottom of the pool is formed nearer to us . we feel that the pool is less deep . from this discussion we conclude that the
 . alternative or non conventional sources of energy advancement in technology has increased our demand for energy . changing lifestyles have made us dependent on machines to do more and more of our tasks . our basic requirements have also increased due to improvement in our living standards .
resistivity m at c . . . x order of very low . x therefore . some of these used in making connecting wires . x . x . moderate value order of very high and . therefore . used for making electrical switches higher than conductors used to x make standard resistors for use in electric iron . toasters . etc
magnetic field due to a current carrying solenoid an insulated copper wire wound on a cylindrical cardboard or plastic tube such that its length is greater than its diameter is called a solenoid .
magnification the image formed by a lens can be larger or smaller than the object . or it can be of the same size . if h . and he denote the object height and the image height . the ratio he h . is defined as the magnification . it is denoted by the symbol m . magnification by a thin lens m . . . . ifm is positive . h . is also positive . this means . the image and the object are on the same side of the principal axis erect image . if m is negative . they are on the opposite sides of the principal axis inverted image . for a convex lens . the image can be erect or inverted . when the image is erect and virtual the magnification is positive . and when the image is inverted and real m is negative . for a concave lens m is always positive . note the difference of sign in the equations for the magnification by a spherical mirror and the magnification by a thin lens .
if we move the object more and more away from the optical centre of the concave lens . the image becomes smaller and smaller in size and moves away from the lens towards its focus . and when the object is at infinity . the image is formed at the focus see figure on page . from this discussion we conclude that when an object is at infinity from a concave lens . the image formed is i at focus f . ii virtual and erect . and iii highly diminished much smaller than the object . and before we conclude this discussion . here is a summary of the images formed by a concave lens .
first law the incident ray . the normal to the transparent surface at the point of incidence and the refracted ray . all lie in the same plane .
f fig . image formation by a convex ex lens when the object is placed at f . f image
 c split ring type commutator it consists of two halves r and r of a metallic ring . the two ends of the armature coil are connected to these two halves of the ring . commutator reverses the direction of current in the armature coil .
fig . image formation when object lies at the focus .
in india oil and natural gas exploration . processing and distribution has been established through oil and natural gas commission ongc . gas authority of india and oil india limited oil . ongc was established in and is engaged in exploring and producing oil in the onshore and offshore areas of the country . ongc is working in bombay high seas . oil was established in and is working in the eastern region . mahanadi basin and rajasthan .
in our country there are a very limited number of places where geothermal energy can be harnessed on a commercial scale . two places where geothermal energy can be exploited on commercial scale are located in madhya pradesh and himachal pradesh . in usa and newzealand . a number of geothermal energy power plants are working successfully . we are now in a position to answer the following questions 
if the object to be seen is far off i . e . . at infinity . then the sharp image of this object can be formed on the retina of the eye by increasing the focal length of the eye lens . the focal length of a lens increases if its thickness decreases . thus . to decrease the thickness of the eye lens and hence to increase its focal length . ciliary muscles are completely relaxed . now the parallel beam of light coming from the far off object is focused on the retina and hence the object is seen clearly . the eye lens is thin and its focal length is large light rays coming from distant object image on the retina ciliary muscles are relaxed
conductors and insulators in some substances . the electric charges can flow easily while in others they cannot . so . all the substances can be divided mainly into two electrical categories conductors and insulators .
place of glass and in place of glass slab we will have to show water by drawing some dotted lines . please draw the diagram to show the refraction of a ray of light from air to water yourself .
when uranium atoms are bombarded with slow moving neutrons . the heavy uranium nucleus breaks up to produce two medium weight atoms . barium and krypton . with the emission of neutrons . a tremendous amount of energy is produced during the fission of uranium . this fission reaction can be represented in the form of a nuclear equation as 
sun parallel light and heat rays convex lens m studygear do image of the sun olj piece of paper figure . a convex lens forms a real image of the sun on a piece of paper .
le sas hege sur eus fig . a rays after reflection from a convex mirror seem to come from points lying behind the mirror . as a result always a virtual image is formed . b image formed by the convex surface of a spoon . fig . concave mirrors are used to concentrate sunlight at solar farms .
calculation of the power of convex lens to correct hypermetropia . the focal length of convex lens needed to correct hypermetropia or long sightedness can be calculated by using the lens formula jū ě . in this formula . the object distance u is to be taken as the normal near point of the eye which is cm and the image distance v will be the distance of the near point of the hypermetropic eye . knowing the focal length of the convex lens . its power can be calculated . this will become more clear from the following example .
images formed by reflection when light starting from an object is reflected off a smooth surface and reaches our eyes . we see an image of the object . the images formed by mirrors are the most common examples of images formed by reflection . images are also formed when light reflects off shiny metal surfaces . the calm surface of the water in a pond . and so on .
billions of litres of water rise and fall through several metres . smaller tides occur twice everyday . all these involve a lot of mechanical energy . a very small fraction of which could meet all our energy requirements . if only we could convert it to electricity . electricity can be generated from the oceans by using the tides . the surface waves and the temperature difference between the different layers of water .
illustrations the chick wakes up late in the morning and goes to sleep early the evening why ans . the retina of chick s eye consists of very few rod shaped cells . due to this it can see only in bright light .
 magnetic field at end point of infinite solenoid b mon cos cos mon 
solar constant tells us the amount of energy which falls in second on a square metre area of the near earth space at an average distance between the sun and the earth . the value of solar constant is . kj s m or . kw m because kj s kw .
smooth surface like that of a plane mirror produces a clear image of an object due to regular reflection of light . a highly polished metal surface and a still water surface also produce regular reflection of light and form images . this is why we can see our face in a polished metal object as well as in the still water surface of a pond or lake . a polished wooden table is very smooth and hence produces regular reflection of light .
draw a thick . long line on a sheet of paper . place a transparent rectangular glass or plastic slab on the line in such a way that the longer edges of the slab make an angle of about with the line . activity from different positions . look at the line through the slab . first look at it vertically from the top . the line below the slab will appear raised . now look along the line from one side of the slab . with your eyes about the same level as the slab . the line on the other side of the slab will appear displaced figure . b . this happens because the rays from the line get shifted sideways on passing through the slab . a b fig . . image of a straight line seen through different faces of a glass slab
the power rating of an electrical device is the value of electrical power consumed by the device under standard conditions .
the resistance of a conductor is given by the expression . r . where p is called the resistivity of the material of which the conductor is made . when a wire of resistance r is drawn to n times the original length . then its resistance becomes nr .
lateral inversion if we stand in front of a big plane mirror . we see the image of our body in it . though our image appears to be just as we are . but there is a difference . this is because if we lift our right hand . then our image lifts its left hand . and if we lift our left hand . then the image appears to lift its right hand see figure . this means that the right side of our body becomes left side in the image whereas the left side of our body becomes right side in the image . it appears as if our image has been reversed sideways with respect to our body . this effect of reversing the sides of an object and its image is called lateral inversion . and we say that the image formed in a plane mirror is laterally inverted . in other words . the image formed in a plane mirror is sideways reversed with respect to the object . we can now define lateral inversion as follows 
a a tide is a periodic rise and fall of ocean water level . the energy possessed by rising and falling water tides is known as tidal energy
case i when the refractive index of the medium is less than that of the lens um u f fo and p po therefore . the focal length increases and consequently the power of the lens decreases . the nature of the lens remains unchanged . since f is still positive . it remains converging .
source of energy ocean sea waves move very fast with the blowing wind . this gives kinetic energy to the ocean sea waves .
linear magnification the linear magnification produced by a lens is defined as the ratio of the size of the image h to the size of the object h . it is represented by m . thus . m size of the image h size of the object h . . . . in terms of object distance u and image distance v . magnification is given by h v m h u
a solar cell is usually made from silicon . a simple solar cell consists of sandwich of a silicon boron layer and a silicon arsenic layer see figure . the amount of boron and arsenic present in the two silicon layers is . however . very small . a small piece of wire is soldered into the top of upper layer of cell and another piece of wire is soldered at the bottom of the lower layer to tap the current .
abc abcdef def diverging lens fig . a diverging lens forms a virtual and erect image .
attached to the eye lens and their other end is attached to ciliary muscles see figure . ciliary muscles change the thickness of eye lens while focusing . in other words . the focal length of eye lens and hence its converging power can be changed by changing its shape by the action of ciliary muscles . in this respect an eye differs from a camera . the focal length of the convex lens used in a camera is fixed and cannot be changed but the focal length of the convex lens present inside the eye can be changed by the action of ciliary muscles .
sign convention for spherical mirrors these days new cartesian sign convention is used for measuring the various distances in the ray diagrams of spherical mirrors concave mirrors and convex mirrors . according to the new cartesian sign convention i all the distances are measured from pole of the mirror as origin . ii distances measured in the same direction as that of incident light are taken as positive .
renewable and nonrenewable sources of energy we have vast but fixed reserves of coal . natural gas and petroleum . these were formed by natural processes over millions of years . however . the rate at which we have been using these sources . their reserves will not last very long . unfortunately . we cannot regenerate them . on the other hand . the sun will continue to shine for about another . billion years . so . as long as there is life on earth . we can use solar energy . sources of energy can be called renewable or nonrenewable based on their reserves as well as our ability to generate them . renewable sources of energy are those which can be generated by us or which are constantly being generated by natural processes or whose supply is unlimited . nonrenewable sources of energy are those which were produced in the past by natural processes . whose supply is limited and which we cannot generate ourselves . coal . natural gas and petroleum are nonrenewable sources of energy . wood is a renewable source of energy although its supply is limited . but . if we replant and use trees in a planned manner . we can be assured of a continuous supply of firewood . the sun . wind and flowing water are also renewable sources because of their unlimited availability . unlike fuels like coal . nuclear fuels such as uranium are required in very small quantities to generate electricity . so . their reserves will last for a long . long time . they are therefore classified as renewable sources of energy .
biogas is used for cooking . running engines and lighting streetlights . ets seeds
 . . . windmill a windmill is a machine that is operated by wind energy . it is simply a large fan which moves when wind blows over it . windmills are used chiefly to provide power to pump water and generate electricity . modern windmills are used to produce electricity and are often termed as wind turbines .
 angular dispersion . dv or uv up a where uv and ur are the refractive indices for violet and red light respectively .
natural magnets are irregular in shape . moreover . they are weak magnets . as iron bar can be made a magnet by rubbing it with a natural magnet . such a magnet is known as man made or artificial magnet . different types of artificial magnets which are most commonly used are shown below 
george simon ohm fig . b ohm s law states physical conditions remaining same . the electric current flowing through a conductor is directly proportional to the potential difference across the two ends of the conductor . resistance is the property of a conductor to resist the flow of charges through it . ohm s law gives . v ir a resistor is a conductor which offers high resistance to the flow of electric current . in drawing electric circuits we follow the usual conventions a zigzag line a represents a resistor and a straight line represents an ideal conducting wire or one with negligible resistance .
this defect can be corrected by using a concave lens of suitable focal length . so . a man suffering from this defect wears spectacles having concave lens of suitable focal length . the concave lens diverges the rays of light entering the eye from infinity . hence this lens makes the rays of light appear come from the far point o of the defective eye as shown in figure c .
some objects themselves produce the light that we see . like the sun . a flame . or a light bulb . such objects are called luminous objects . most objects . though . reflect into our eye light that originates elsewhere . and if it were not for reflection . we would not be able to see them . such objects are called non luminous object . our moon is an example of a non luminous object . as it reflects the light of the sun .
 . hazards of using nuclear energy the major hazard of nuclear power generation is the storage and disposal of spent or used fuels and the uranium still decaying into harmful subatomic particles radiations . improper nuclear waste storage and disposal result in environmental contamination . further . there is a risk of accidental leakage of nuclear radiation . the high cost of installation of a nuclear power plant . high risk of environmental contamination and limited availability of uranium makes large scale use of nuclear energy prohibitive .
position of image appears at the principal focus on the same side as that of the object appears between the principal focus and the lens
 . ohm s law and resistance the current that a battery can push through a wire is analogous to the water flow that a pump can push through a pipe . greater pump pressures lead to larger water flow rates . and . similarly . greater battery voltages lead to larger electric currents .
 . direction of electric current today . it is known that electrons flow in metal wires . figure . shows the electrons emerging from the negative terminal of the battery and moving around the circuit toward the positive terminal . however . electrons were not known at the time when the phenomenon of electricity was first observed . so . electric current was considered to be the flow of positive charges and the direction of flow of positive charges was taken to be the direction of electric current . therefore . as a custom instead . a so called conventional current is used . for reasons that date back to the time when it was believed that positive charges moved through metal wires . conventional current is the hypothetical flow of positive charges that would have the same effect in the circuit as the movement of electrons that actually does occur .
since the direction of induced current in the coil is reversed after half revolution so the polarity positive and negative of the two ends of the coil also changes after half revolution . the end of coil which was positive in the first half of revolution becomes negative in the second half . and the end which was negative in the first half revolution becomes positive in the second half of revolution . thus . in revolution of the coil . the current reverses its direction times . in this way alternating current is produced in this generator .
 . scattering of light a clear cloudless daytime sky is blue because molecules in the air scatter
resistivity . . . it has been found by experiments that i the resistance of a given conductor is directly proportional to its length . that is roc ii the resistance of a given conductor is inversely proportional to its area of cross section . that is . . . . by combining the relations and . we get ra r . a r . r px 
binding energy the energy equivalent of the mass defect of a nucleus is called its binding energy ep amc zm . a z mn m c if masses are expressed in atomic mass units . ae zmp a z mn m x . mev eb ο α binding energy per nucleon . aebin it is the average energy needed to separate a nucleus into its individual nucleons .
graph between v and i if a graph is drawn between the potential difference readings v and the corresponding current values . the graph is found to be a straight line passing through the origin see figure . a straight line graph can be obtained only if the two quantities are directly proportional to one another . since the current potential difference graph is a straight line . we conclude that current is directly proportional to the potential difference . it is clear from the graph oa that as the potential difference v increases . the current i also increases . but the ratio remains constant . this constant is called resistance of the conductor . we will now solve one problem based on the graph between v and i .
if we open the switch as shown in figure b . then a gap is created between the two ends of the connecting wire . due to this . one terminal of the cell gets disconnected from the bulb and current stops flowing in the circuit . thus . when the switch is open . the circuit breaks and no current flows through the bulb . the bulb stops glowing see figure b .
please note that smaller the focal length of a convex lens . greater will be its magnifying power . so .
 b strong field magnet armature coil is placed between two pole pieces n and s poles of a strong magnet . this magnet provides a strong magnetic field .
in general . if a number of thin lenses having powers p . p . p . . . . . . . etc . . are placed in close contact with one another . then their resultant power p is given by pp p p p . . . . . . . . . . . . . . please note that the individual powers p . p . p . etc . . of the lenses should be put in the above formula with their proper signs . the use of powers of lenses instead of their focal lengths makes the work of opticians very simple and straightforward . for example . when an optician places two convex lenses of powers . d and . d in
 let there be n resistors rp . . . . . r . with rmax max r . . . . . . . . rn and rmin min r . . . . . rn . show that when they are connected in parallel . the resultant resistance rp rmin and when they are connected in series . the resultant resistance rs rmax . interpret the result physically . ans . when n resistors are connected in parallel . the effective resistance rp is rp rp r . . . r rmin rmin rmin . . . rmin rp . rp . rp . rp . . . min bu or rmin rp when n resistors are in series . then rs r r . . . rn . . rg rmax
fig . a magnetic compass . a piece of substance . which possesses the property of attracting small pieces of iron towards it . is called a magnet .
me contact lenses require greater care than spectacles . they need to be stored and cleaned in the prescribed fashion . improper use and maintenance of contact lenses can affect the cornea .
running water possesses kinetic energy which can be utilised to generate electric power .
in figure . we have an object ab placed between the pole p and focus f of a concave mirror . that is . the object is within the focus of the concave mirror . to find out the position and nature of the image . starting from a . we draw a ray ad parallel to the axis see figure . this ray gets reflected at d and then passes through the focus f . a second ray of light ae passing through the centre of curvature c strikes the mirror normally or perpendicularly at point e and gets reflected back along the same path .
a ray of light ao travelling in air is incident on a rectangular glass slab pqrs at point o . on entering the glass slab . it gets refracted along ob and bends towards the normal on see figure . a second change of direction takes place when the refracted ray of light ob . travelling in glass emerges or comes out into air at point b . since the ray of light ob now goes from a denser medium glass into the rarer medium air . it bends away from the normal bn and goes in the direction bc . please note that the incident ray ao and the emergent ray bc are parallel to each others though the emergent ray has been displaced parallel to the incident ray . the incident ray ao and emergent ray bc are parallel to each other because the extent of bending of the ray of light at points o and b on the opposite . parallel faces pq and sr of the rectangular glass slab is equal and opposite . the incident ray ao bends towards the normal at point o whereas the
figure . the concave metal dishes are used in dish antennas or dish aerials of televisions to receive tv signals from the very distant communications satellites which are high up in the sky see figure b . the dish is a concave reflector . the dish collects a large amount of parallel beams of tv signals coming from the far off satellite and converges them to its focus . the antenna or signal detector is fixed in front of the concave dish at its focus . since the antenna is fixed at the focus of dish . it receives the strongest possible tv signals from the satellite which make our television work . the tv signals coming from satellite can be made even more stronger by using a bigger dish in the dish antenna . please note that though the tv signals coming from the satellite are not light rays . they obey the laws of reflection of light .
rule . a ray of light which is incident at the pole of a convex mirror is reflected back making the same angle with the principal axis . this is shown in figure . here a ray of light ap is incident on the pole p of the convex mirror making an angle of incidence i with the principal axis xp . it gets reflected along the direction ph making an equal angle of reflection r with the principal axis see figure .
case refraction of light when it goes from a denser medium to a rarer medium
case . when the object is beyond f object beyond f figure shows an object ab placed beyond f in front of a convex lens . to construct the ray diagram . we first take a ray of light ad parallel to the principal axis . after refraction . it will pass through focus f and go in the direction df . a second ray of light ac . passing through the optical centre c will go straight in the direction ca . the two refracted rays meet at point a . so a is the real image of point a of the object . to get the complete image . we draw a b perpendicular to the axis . thus . a b is the complete image of the object ab . and it is formed between f and f on the other side of the lens . the image is real . inverted and smaller than the object . from the above discussion c
the suspended particles of milk scatter more of the bluish lights . this makes the mixture look bluish near the torch . as light travels down the container . the components of light left are mainly reddish in colour . so . the light looks orange or red . a similar thing happens in nature to make skies blue and the sun red when it rises or sets .
advantages of nuclear energy a it produces a large amount of useful energy from a very small amount of a nuclear fuel like uranium . b once the nuclear fuel like uranium is loaded into the reactor . the nuclear power plant can go on producing electricity for two to three years at a stretch . there is no need for putting in nuclear fuel again and again . c it does not produce gases like carbon dioxide which contributes to greenhouse effect or sulphur dioxide which causes acid rain .
applications of the heating effect of current the heating effect of electric current has many uses . electric bulbs . room heaters . electric irons . immersion heaters . toasters . electric fuses and a number of other appliances work on this principle . in all of these . a wire of suitable resistance . commonly called the heating element . is connected to the power supply . the current passing through the element produces heat in it . which is used for some specific purpose . we shall discuss two common devices here .
the linear magnification produced by a lens is equal to the ratio of image distance to the object distance . that is image distance magnification object distance or m where m magnification v image distance and u object distance it should be noted that this second magnification formula for lenses differs only in sign from the magnification formula for mirrors . the magnification formula for the mirrors is . m whereas that for lenses is . m . it is clear that the magnification formula for mirrors has a minus sign but the magnification formula for lenses has no minus sign . if the magnification m has a positive value . the image is virtual and erect . and if the magnification m has a negative value . the image will be real and inverted . since a convex lens can form virtual images as well as real images . therefore . the magnification produced by a convex lens can be either positive or negative . a concave lens . however . forms only virtual images . so the magnification produced by a concave lens is always positive . a convex lens can form images which are smaller than the object . equal to the object or bigger than the object . therefore . the magnification m produced by a convex lens can be less than . equal to or more than . on the other hand . a concave lens forms images which are always smaller than the object . so the magnification m produced by a concave lens is always less than .
 d flowing water is a more reliable source of energy than wind . e hydroelectricity can be generated on a large scale from a single plant . f dams built for hydroelectric plants also help in flood control and irrigation . g small hydroelectric stations are one of the best options for generating electricity from renewable sources . as they do not affect the environment much .
waves in the ocean involve a lot of kinetic energy . which can be converted to electricity . the water at the surface of the ocean is warmer than the water deep below . their temperature difference can be utilized to generate electricity .
 d by rotating the coil faster . e by using a coil with a larger area . m studygear
nuclear energy a physical reaction which involves changes in the nucleus of an atom is called a nuclear reaction . the energy released during a nuclear reaction is called nuclear energy because it comes from the nucleus of an atom . nuclear energy can be obtained by two types of nuclear reactions i nuclear fission . and ii nuclear fusion .
we look at a concave mirror from the front . it appears to be like a piece of thin round glass whose front surface is shining and bent inward whereas back surface is covered with a paint and bulging outward .
magnetic field due to a current carrying straight conductor when a current is passed through a straight conductor conducting wire . a magnetic field is produced around it . this magnetic field can be traced by means of iron filings or a small compass needle .
the human eye the main parts of the human eye are cornea . iris . pupil . ciliary muscles . eye lens . retina and optic nerve see figure . the eye ball is approximately spherical in shape having a diameter of about . cm . we will now describe the construction and working of the eye .
we can understand this fact in the following manner . oersted found that a current carrying conductor produces a magnetic field around itself . when this current carrying conductor is placed in the magnetic field of a magnet . then the magnetic fields of the conductor and the magnet interact . this interaction leads to a force . this force is experienced by both the magnet and the current carrying conductor . in accordance with newton s third law of motion .
introduction the greeks knew the phenomenon of magnetism . as early as around bc . they discovered that certain stones . now called magnetite fe . attract pieces of iron . the chinese called it the lodestone i . e . . the leading stone . legend ascribes the name magnetite to the shepherd magnes . the nails of whose shoes and the tip of whose staff stuck fast in a magnetic field while he pastured his flocks . in pierre de maricourt . using a spherical natural magnet . mapped out the directions taken by a needle when placed at various points on the surface of the sphere . he found that . the directions formed lines that encircle the sphere passing through two points . diametrically opposite to each other . which he called the poles of the magnet . subsequent experiments showed that every magnet . regardless of its shape . has two poles . called north and south poles . which exhibit forces on each other in a manner analogous to electrical charges . that is . like poles repel each other and unlike poles attract each other .
the actual sunrise takes place when the sun is just above the horizon . but due to refraction of sunlight caused by the atmosphere . we can see the rising sun about minutes before it is actually above the horizon . this happens as follows when the sun is slightly below the horizon . then the sun s light coming from less dense air to more dense air is refracted downwards as it passes through the atmosphere . because of this atmospheric refraction . the sun appears to be raised above the horizon when actually it is slightly below the horizon . for example . in figure . the actual position of the sun is at a just below the horizon but it
calculation of power of concave lens to correct myopia . the focal length of concave lens needed to correct myopia or short sightedness in a person is calculated by using the lens formula i ū . in this formula . the object distance u is to be taken as infinity oo . and the image distance v will be the distance of person s far point which is different for different persons . knowing the focal length of the concave lens . we can calculate its power . this will become more clear from the following example .
when this reflected light enters our eyes . then we are able to see the flower or chair because to our eyes . this light appears to be coming from the flower or chair see figure . those objects which do not emit light themselves but only reflect or scatter the light which falls on them . are called non luminous objects see figure . a flower . chair . table . book . trees . other plants . human beings . fan . bed . mirror . diamond . walls . floor . and road . etc . . are all non luminous objects . in fact . most of the objects around us are non luminous objects . we can see the non luminous objects because they reflect light received from a luminous object into our eyes . even the moon is a non luminous object because it does not have its own light . we can see the moon because it reflects the sunlight falling on its surface towards us on the earth .
the straight line direction in which the reflected rays enter it . so . the person looking into the mirror from position e sees the reflected rays as if they are coming from the point i behind the mirror because i is the point of intersection of the reflected rays when produced backwards to the right side . thus . point i is the image of the object o formed by the plane mirror . for example . if our face is at position o in front of the plane mirror . then we will see the image of our face in the mirror at point i .
petustyyttes p lytytystulpel e current aga acca osa goro de gadsiado toda tontoado ord so od tolo ml a gioco ago logo ortegado dezodoroedraforcat agomagagarapagunagogagododecaganda da da da hoogsto ods gata di dadagdodo magnetic compass re batista adagascar truga traagcaurugand autoga erg arage obor rbara g ba edua h eidenauantito gagapanda abardas tidad garantuotant contracten te r tuttanada lido instituutunut larte delle stell ers de derborg attrabalhadores escolesarstrasseggertrud coco rouge je herebon olo clorok fig . d ampere s swimming rule .
ra x ohm cm pet . ohm m
bi concave lens plano convexo concave lens concave lens fig . the three types of concave lenses .
activity corner to study image formation by convex mirror . place two trolleys on the rails of the optical bench . on one trolley fix a convex mirror such that its reflecting surface is towards the other trolley . fix a pen on the other trolley . place the two trolleys as close as possible . you will see a virtual and erect image of the pen when you watch the reflecting surface of the mirror . the image will appear behind the mirror . now move the trolley on which the pen is attached away from the trolley on which the mirror is fixed . simultaneously see the reflecting surface of the mirror to watch the image . you will find that the image remain virtual
formation of image by a concave lens in figure . we have a concave lens with optical centre c . and f is the focus of this lens . the arrow ab pointing upwards represents the object . now . we want to find out the position . nature and size of the image of this object which will be formed by the concave lens . the method used for obtaining the images with concave lenses is very similar to the one we have used in the case of convex lenses . this is as follows .
 . . image formed by a convex lens the given ray diagrams show the formation of image by a convex lens when an object is placed at different positions in front of a convex lens .
 . snow rule if the direction of the current flowing through the wire is from south s to north n and the wire is placed over the needle . the north pole of the needle is deflected towards the west .
direction of magnetic field right hand thumb rule to find the direction of magnetic field due to straight current carrying conductor . we use the right hand thumb rule which is given by maxwell . according to it . imagine the straight conductor in your right hand such that the thumb points in the direction of current . the direction of curl of fingers of the right hand gives the direction of magnetic field lines .
plane mirror a highly polished plane flat surface is called a plane mirror . e . g . looking glass . the side having short . oblique lines represents the back side of the plane mirror . the image formed by a plane mirror can be seen only by looking into the mirror .
brushes two carbon brushes by and b press against the commutator . these brushes act as the contacts between the commutator and the terminals of the battery . d 
the light entering the eye is bent mainly at the cornea before falling on the crystalline lens at which a little additional bending takes place . the cornea lens fluid system of the eye is equivalent to a single converging lens the eye lens . the ciliary muscles contract and relax to change the overall focal length of the eye lens so that sharp images of objects at different distances are formed on the retina . this process is called accommodation . the retina has millions of receptors known as rods and cones . these receptors pass image information to the brain via an optic nerve connected to each eye . rods are more numerous and work in dim light also . cones gather information about colour and details . and need good light to work . the farthest point up to which the eye can see properly is called the far point of the eye . the closest point at which an object can be placed and seen clearly is called the near point . and . the distance of the closest point at which an object can be placed and seen clearly is called the least distance of distinct vision or least distance of clear vision .
do you know the electric eel s body contains about to biological cells called electroplaques . each electroplaque produes a small voltage . however . when they are arranged in series . the resulting voltage can be about to volts . the water surrounding the eel is a relatively good conductor and it completes the electric circuit between electric eel s electroplaque array . its head and tail . any prey that comes into contact with the electric eel will get an electric shock as there will be a current flowing from the eel to the prey . what a way to fry your meal before you eat it .
sign convention the quantities u . v . f and r denote the positions of the object . the image . the focus and the centre of curvature as measured from the pole . the sign of the quantity is positive if the corresponding distance is measured along the incident rays . and it is negative if the distance is measured opposite to the incident rays .
thermal power plant an installation where electricity or electrical power is generated is called a power plant . a power plant is also called a power house or power station . a power plant in which the heat required to make steam to drive turbines to make electricity is obtained by burning fuels coal . oil or gas is called thermal power plant . we will now decribe how fossil fuels are used to produce electricity .
capacity or the ability of a lens to deviate converge or diverge the path of rays passing through it . a lens producing more convergence or more divergence . is said to have more power . it is represented by the symbol p . the power of a lens depends on its focal length .
figure shows a ray of light ao going from glass a denser medium into air which is a rarer medium . in this case . the incident ray ao gets refracted at point o and bends away from the normal on in the direction ob . thus . when a ray of light goes from glass into air . it bends away from the normal at the point of incidence . in this case the angle of refraction r is greater than the angle of incidence i .
dispersive power . o angular dispersion mean deviation m mv ur u where mv mr mean refractive index it depends on the material of the prism . it is a unitless and dimensionless quantity . dispersive power of a flint glass prism is more than that of a crown glass prism .
magnetic field lines due to a current in a straight conductor the direction of the magnetic field due to a current can be studied by drawing magnetic field lines . activity fix a long stiff wire ab upright in a piece of cardboard kept horizontally . connect the wire to a battery through a switch . as shown in figure . a . use long connecting wires to keep the battery and the switch away from the cardboard . now . place a compass on the cardboard . start the current by closing the switch . the compass needle will get deflected . and its direction will show the direction of the magnetic field at that point . mark the position of the north pole of the needle on the cardboard . shift the compass ahead so that the south pole of the needle lies at the point marked for the previous position of the north pole . mark the new position of the north pole . repeat the procedure till you reach the point from where you started . join all the points by a smooth curve to give a field ine . similarly . draw other field lines at different distances from the wire . draw arrows on the lines to show the direction of the magnetic field . if the current is strong . say about a . the lines will be nearly circular . if the current is weak . it will produce a weak magnetic field . then the earth s magnetic field will have greater effect on the field lines . and they will not be circular .
 prove that . if an insulated . uncharged conductor is placed near a charged conductor and no other conductors are present . the uncharged body must be intermediate in potential between that of the charged body and that of infinity . ans . let us consider a path from the charged conductor to the uncharged conductor along the
myopia near sightedness or short sightedness myopia is that defect of human eye by virtue of which it can see clearly the objects lying at short distance from it . but the far off objects cannot be seen clearly by the myopic eye .
monopoles do not exist . s ni s nis n s niss n fig . if you break a magnet into half . you do not obtain isolated north and south poles instead . two new magnets are produced . each with a north and a south pole .
 c the direction of electrons in a current carrying conductor or a stream of positively charged particles or a stream of negatively charged particles like electrons tells us the direction of force acting on it .
scope of wind energy it is estimated that india can produce more than . mw of electricity from wind energy . by . india had an installed wind electric capacity of about mw . this made india among the top five producers of electricity from wind along with germany . usa . denmark and spain . the state leading in wind electric generation was tamil nadu .
sources of energy rise of ocean water is called high tide and the fall of ocean water is called low tide . these waves jwar bhata in the oceans build up and recede rise and fall twice a day . between the high tides and low tides . there is an enormous movement of water which generates large amount of energy . it occurs in the coastal areas .
since the sun s image is formed at the focus of the concave mirror . therefore . the distance of sun s image or paper from the concave mirror gives us an approximate value of the focal length of the concave mirror .
heating effect of electric current when an electric current passes through a wire . the heat produced is proportional to the square of the current . the resistance of the wire and the time for which the current flows . the common unit of electrical energy is the kilowatt hour . the electrical energy produced or consumed per unit time is called electric power .
illustrations mention shortcomings of the energy we get from sea waves . ans . shortcomings of energy from sea waves i a minimum energy density of mw km is required to explore energy from sea waves profitably . ii initial cost of establishing the plant is high .
we will now discuss why the sun appears white when it is overhead in the sky . when the sun is overhead as at noon . then the light coming from the sun has to travel a relatively shorter distance through the atmosphere to reach us . during this shorter journey of sunlight . only a little of the blue colour of the white light is scattered most of the blue light remains in it . since the light coming from the overhead sun has almost all its component colours in the right proportion . therefore . the sun in the sky overhead appears white to us see figure .
 i bar magnet bar magnet is an artificial magnet which may be rectangular or cylindrical in shape .
electromagnetic induction oersted s experiment shows that a current produces a magnetic field . should the reverse is not true is a magnet used to produce current michael faraday began to work on this problem in . for six years . he experimented with magnets and coils of wire until one day in desperation he threw the magnet down into the coil and observed that a momentary current was produced in the coil . this is how a very important discovery was made on th october . after six years of hard labour .
this can be written as medium in medium speed of light in medium speed of light in medium or in v where in refractive index of medium with respect to medium v speed of light in medium and v speed of light in medium please note that the symbol medium nmedium or n means that it is the refractive index of medium with respect to medium for the light entering from medium into medium . we have represented the refractive index of medium with respect to medium by the symbol în . in some books . however . the refractive index of medium with respect to medium is represented by the symbol n read as n two one and not as n twenty one . we have not used this notation because we find it a bit confusing .
the solenoid it is a coil which has length and used to produce uniform magnetic field of long range .
we should use a convex lens of short focal length as a magnifying glass . it will produce large magnification and hence the object will appear much bigger when seen through it . for example . a convex lens of cm focal length will have a greater magnifying power than a convex lens of cm focal length . so . we should use the convex lens having a shorter focal length of cm as the magnifying glass . thus . if we are given two convex lenses of focal lengths cm and cm respectively . then we should prefer to use the convex lens having cm focal length as a magnifying glass to see small things or read small letters of a dictionary .
rule . a ray of light which is incident at the pole of a concave mirror is reflected back making the same angle with the principal axis . this is shown in figure . here a ray of light ap is incident at the pole p of the concave mirror making an angle of incidence i with the principal axis . it gets reflected along the direction ph such that the angle of reflection r is equal to the angle of incidence i .
concentration of co in atmosphere increases significantly this could have the effect of increasing the average temperature of the earth . . combustion of coal . gasoline and other fossil fuels in the presence of insufficient supply of oxygen liberates carbon monoxide and unburnt hydrocarbons . carbon monoxide co combines with haemoglobin in the blood to form carboxy haemoglobin and makes it incapable of transporting oxygen . many hydrocarbons are carcinogenic and hence . are serious health hazards . . coal contains some compounds of sulphur and nitrogen . during combustion these compounds are oxidized to form the oxides of sulphur and nitrogen . which are corrosive and poisonous . during rains these oxides dissolve in rainwater and are known to cause acid rain . . when gasoline burns in internal combustion engines . a very high temperature is produced . at this high temperature . nitrogen and oxygen combine to form oxides of nitrogen such as no and no . these oxides are highly poisonous and cause many respiratory problems . moreover . gasoline also contains some additives such as a tetraethyl lead ch pb . tetraethyl lead is added to gasoline to reduce knocking irregular combustion . during combustion it produces volatile lead compounds which are released in the air . these compounds are highly poisonous and cause serious pollution .
 iv the direction of the magnetic field at the centre is perpendicular to the plane of the coil .
pid . is experienced in old age and therefore . also called old age hypermetropia . cause of presbyopia this defect arises due to the ageing of a person . the ciliary muscles are weakened and the flexibility of the crystalline lens of the human eye decreases with age of the person . as a result . human eye is unable to focus on close objects .
the word generator is a misnomer a word which does not justify its meaning . a generator does not generate anything . it simply converts mechanical energy into electrical energy .
another similar prism . for this he made a small hole in the white screen and obtained the spectrum from the first prism on it . he adjusted the screen in such a way that only a limited portion of spectrum a single colour say yellow colour passes through the hole . this is then made to fall on the similar prism b which is placed in an inverted position with respect to the screen .
 v principal focus f it is a point on the principal axis at which the rays parallel to the principal axis meet after reflection or seem to come from . in figure . . f is the principal focus . the parallel rays after reflection from a concave mirror meet in front of the mirror at point f . this is the focus of the concave mirror . in case of a convex mirror after reflection the parallel rays seems to come from a point f behind the mirror . this is the focus of the convex mirror . therefore . for a concave mirror the focus lies in front of the mirror and for a convex mirror it lies behind the mirror . in other words . a concave mirror has a real focus while a convex mirror has a virtual focus .
why the sun appears red at sunrise and sunset the sun and the surrounding sky appear red at sunrise and at sunset because at that time most of the blue colour present in sunlight has been scattered out and away from our line of sight . leaving behind mainly red colour in the direct sunlight beam that reaches our eyes . this can be explained as follows .
 if we look at the above nuclear fission reaction equation . we find that the neutrons are used up as well as produced . for example . in the nuclear fission of uranium described above . neutron is consumed and neutrons are produced in the fission of each nucleus . the neutrons produced in a fission process cause further fission of the heavy nuclei leading to a self sustaining chain reaction . when all the neutrons produced during fission of uranium are allowed to cause further fission . then so much energy is produced in a very short time that it cannot be controlled and leads to an explosion called atom bomb . we can . however . control a nuclear fission reaction by using control rods made of boron . boron has a property that it can absorb neutrons . so . when a nuclear fission reaction is carried out in the presence of boron rods . the excess neutrons produced during successive fissions of uranium atoms are absorbed by boron rods and hence not available to cause further fission . due to this a controlled fission reaction of uranium takes place liberating heat energy at a slow . steady and manageable rate which can be used for generating electricity at a nuclear power plant .
 the image of face in the backside convex surface of a shining steel spoon is virtual . erect and diminished .
bo fig . a myopic eye .
m or and where m magnification h height of image hị height of object we will now write another formula for the magnification produced by a lens in terms of the image distance and object distance .
u r real . inverted . same size u f image at infinity real . inverted . reduced real . i inverted . enlarged virtual . upright . enlarged u r c t f u . r u f ar fig . graphical representation of the results shown in the table above .
laws of reflection of light the reflection of light from a plane surface like that of a plane mirror or from a spherical surface like that of a concave mirror or convex mirror takes place according to two laws . which are known as the laws of reflection of light . the laws of reflection of light are given
d . c . generator we have just studied an a . c . generator which produces alternating current . in order to obtain direct current which flows in one direction only . a d . c . generator is used . actually . if we replace the slip rings of an a . c . generator by a commutator . then it will become a d . c . generator . thus . in a d . c . generator . a split ring type commutator is used like the one used in an electric motor . when the two half rings of commutator are connected to the two ends of the generator coil . then one carbon brush is at all times in contact with the coil arm moving down in the magnetic field while the other carbon brush always remains in contact with the coil arm moving up in the magnetic field . due to this . the current in outer circuit always flows in one direction . so . it is direct current . a diagram of d . c . generator is given in figure .
a temperature difference of about c upto a water level difference of m is required for operating otec systems .
it shows that the direction of the force on the conductor depends upon the direction of current and the direction of the magnetic field . experiments have shown that the displacement of the rod is largest or the magnitude of the force is the highest when the direction of current is at right angles to the direction of the magnetic field . in such a situation the force experienced by the current carrying conductor is perpendicular to both the direction of current and the direction of the magnetic field .
 . simple electric circuit the simplest circuit which we come across is the circuit consisting of a battery two cells and a bulb in a torch . when the torch is switched on . an electric current flows through the bulb . which lights up .
 . solar heating devices a solar heating device is one application of solar energy which is enjoying most success today . a device which gets heated by sun s heat is called a solar heating device . a solar heating device must be designed in such a way so that it is capable of collecting and concentrating the maximum amount of sun s heat when it is exposed to sunlight . this is done by using one of the following methods . use of a reflector use of black painted surface use of glass sheet cover
 . magnetic field pattern due to a circular loop or circular wire carrying current we know that when current is passed through a straight wire . it has been found that the magnetic effect of current increases if instead of using a straight wire . the wire is converted into a circular loop as shown in figure . in figure . a circular loop or circular wire is fixed to a thin cardboard sheet t . when a current is passed through the circular loop of wire . a magnetic field is produced around it . the pattern of magnetic field due to a current carrying circular loop or circular wire is shown in figure . the magnetic field lines are circular near the current carrying loop . as we move away . the concentric circles representing magnetic field lines become bigger and bigger . at the centre of the circular loop . the magnetic field lines are straight see point m in figure . by applying right hand thumb rule . it can be seen that each segment of circular loop carrying current produces magnetic field lines in the same direction within the loop . at the centre of the circular loop . all the magnetic field lines are in the same direction and aid each other . due to which the strength of magnetic field increases .
mini dams also have been constructed to harness the hydro energy .
electromagnet a magnet formed temporarily due to the magnetic field of a current is called an
images formed by lenses can be either real or virtual . an image is said to be real if the rays of light after refraction through a lens . actually meet at a point . a real image is always inverted . it can be brought to focus on a screen . an in said to be virtual if the rays of light after refraction through a lens seem to come from a point . a virtual image is always erect . it cannot be brought to focus on a screen .
advantages is available everywhere . is available in plenty and is free nonpolluting limitations it cannot be used at night devices based on solar energy do not work well on cloudy days . a solar heating device uses solar energy to heat things like water and food . a solar heating device can be made effective by a increasing the absorption of heat . b reducing the loss of heat . and c increasing and concentrating the sunlight collected .
a spherical mirror is a part of a spherical reflecting surface as shown in figure . . spherical mirrors are of two types i concave mirror and ii convex mirror . concave mirror a concave mirror or converging mirror . has a reflective surface that bulges inward away from the incident light . convex mirror a convex mirror . fish eye mirror or diverging mirror is a curved mirror in which the reflective surface bulges toward the light source .
the main fuse in domestic wiring consists of a porcelain fuse holder h having two brass terminals ti and t in it see figure a . this is connected in the live wire . the other part of the fuse is a removable fuse grip g which is also made of porcelain . the fuse grip has a fuse wire fixed in it . when fuse grip is inserted in the fuse holder as shown in figure a . then the circuit of our domestic wiring is completed . so . under normal circumstances when the current is within limit . the fuse wire is intact and electric current is available in our wiring .
minimum wind velocity required for a functional windmill is about km h .
lenses differ from mirrors . however . in that light can pass through a lens from left to right or from right to left . therefore . when constructing ray diagrams . begin by locating a focal point f on each side of the lens each point lies on the principal axis at the same distance f from the lens . the lens is assumed to be a thin lens . in that its thickness is small compared with the focal length and the distances of the object and the image from the lens . for convenience . it is also assumed that the object is located to the left of the lens and is placed perpendicular to the principal axis . there are three paraxial rays that leave a point on the top of the object and are especially helpful in drawing ray diagrams . when tracing their paths . we follow the reasoning strategy outlined below 
atmospheric refraction atmospheric refraction is responsible for a number of optical phenomena such as the twinkling of stars and the appearance of a heavenly body higher than its actual position .
or actually . watt is a small unit . therefore . a bigger unit of electric power called kilowatt is used for commercial purposes . it is obvious that kilowatt watts kw w it should be noted that the symbol for watt is w and that for kilowatt is kw . when work is done . an equal amount of energy is consumed . so . we can also say that electric power is the rate at which electrical energy is consumed . in other words . electric power is the electrical energy consumed per second . we can now write down another definition of watt based on electrical energy . when an electrical appliance consumes electrical energy at the rate of joule per second . its power is said to be watt . we have just given two definitions of electric power . one by using the term work and another by using the term energy . we can combine these two definitions and say that the rate at
 i armature coil it consists of a large number of turns of a rectangular coil abcd made of copper wire wound over a soft iron laminated core . ii strong field magnets two poles of permanent magnets between which the armature coil is rotated . iii split rings or half rings the two ends of the coil are welded to two semicircular metallic rings r . and r . . these rings are called the split rings or half rings . the function of the split rings is to change the direction of current flowing through the coil after each half rotation . iv brushes two carbon brushes b . and b . make a contact with the split rings r . and rz .
we will now describe what happens when a ray of light falls normally or perpendicularly on the surface of a mirror . if a ray of
a simple de generator consists of an armature coil of copper wire wound on a soft iron core . the armature coil rotates between the pole pieces of a strong magnet . the free ends of the coil are connected to the commutator or split rings r . and r . two metallic brushes b . and b are in contact with the split rings . these brushes are called the contact brushes . the output is obtained across a load resistance which is connected to the metallic brushes see figure . .
 iii concave mirrors are used as reflectors in torches . vehicle head lights and search lights to get powerful beams of light . this is because when a lighted bulb is placed at the focus of a concave reflector . then the concave reflector produces a powerful beam of parallel light rays . this helps us see things up to a considerable distance in the darkness of night . concave reflectors are also used in room heaters . the concave reflectors of room heaters direct heat rays into the whole room .
a large amount of sun s heat rays at its focus due to which a high temperature is produced in the focus area which is suitable for baking and frying . thus . a concave mirror reflector is best suited for use in a solar cooker . we will now give the advantages and limitations of a solar cooker .
 ii the rise and fall of sea water during high and low tides is not enough to generate electricity on a large scale .
please note that when the object kept at infinity in front of a concave mirror is assumed to be a big arrow pointing upwards . then its image is formed at focus according to the ray diagram shown in figure . if . however . the object kept at infinity in front of a concave mirror is round in shape like the sun . then its image is formed at the focus according to the ray diagram shown in figure on page .
 magnetic field a magnet produces a magnetic field in the space around it . which exerts a force on any other magnet placed in it . each point in this field has a particular strength and direction . the direction of the magnetic field can be found by placing a magnetic compass at that point . the needle of the compass settles along the direction of the field .
the solar cell is covered with a glass cover or a transparent plastic cover for protection . when sunlight falls on the surface of solar cell . it makes the loosely held electrons in the silicon atoms move due to which a current begins to flow in the wires connected to the top and bottom of the solar cell . the strength of current produced depends on the brightness of the light and the efficiency of solar cell . a potential difference or voltage of about . v is generated between the top and bottom surface of a solar cell . at present . the best designed solar cells can generate w m² in bright sunlight . with a maximum efficiency of about .
 . fleming s right hand rule from the experiment explained above . we find that the induced current changes its direction with the motion of the magnet in opposite direction . the induced current is found to be the highest when the direction of motion of the coil is at right angles to the magnetic field . in this situation . we can use simple rule called fleming s right hand rule or the dynamo rule to find the direction of induced current .
working let the coil abcd . initially in the horizontal position . be rotated clockwise i . e . . the arm cd moves downwards and arm ab upwards . due to the motion of the coil in the magnetic field . induced current is produced in the coil from c to d according to fleming s right hand rule . this makes brush b . positive and brush b . negative . after half rotation . the arms of the coil interchange their positions . arm ab comes to the right and arm cd to the left . during the second half of the rotation . current flows from b to a in the arm ab .
 the above person prefers to remove his spectacles while reading a book . explain why ans . the myopic person may have a normal near point . i . e . about cm or even less . in order to
optical centre and principal axis of a lens the centre point of a lens is known as its optical centre . the optical centre of a lens is usually denoted by the letter c . in figure . c is the optical centre of the convex lens . the optical centre of a lens has a property that a ray of light passing through it does not suffer any deviation and goes straight . the optical centre of a lens is sometimes also denoted by the letter o . the principal axis of a lens is a line passing through the optical centre of the lens and perpendicular
ad and ac coming from the same point a of the object . the incident rays ad and ac are parallel to one another but at an angle to the principal axis . the incident ray ad gets refracted along dx . the second ray ac passing through the optical centre c of the lens goes straight along cy and meets the first refracted ray at a . thus . a is the real image of the top point a of the object . we draw a b perpendicular to the axis from a . thus . a b is the complete image of the object ab placed at infinity . it is clear from figure . that the image is formed at the focus of the lens . it is real . inverted and much smaller than the object . from this discussion we conclude that when an object is at infinity from a convex lens . then the image formed is i at the focus . ii real and inverted . and iii much smaller than the object or highly diminished .
when the magnet is stationary . there is no deflection in the galvanometer .
line which represents a virtual ray of light . now . ae represents a ray of light going towards the centre of curvature c of the convex mirror . according to the second rule of image formation . this ray is reflected along the same path ea but it appears to be coming from the centre of curvature c .
fig . a when a light beam moves from air to glass rarer to denser medium . it bends towards the normal . b when the beam moves from glass to air denser to rarer medium . it bends away from the normal . light refracts because it has different speeds in different media .
 in previous problem . calculate the refractive index of first medium with respect to second medium . ans . from relation n putting values . we get n i multiplying and dividing eqn . i by bex . 
good conductors . resistors and insulators on the basis of their electrical resistance . all the substances can be divided into three groups good conductors . resistors and insulators . those substances which have very low electrical resistance are called good conductors . a good conductor allows the electricity to flow through it easily . silver metal is the best
suppose a vertical wire carries a current in the upward direction . also . suppose that a magnetic field exists from east to west . to apply fleming s left hand rule to this situation . stretch the forefinger . second finger and thumb of your left hand at right angles to each other . keep the hand such that the forefinger points west and the second finger points upwards figure . b . you will find that the thumb points towards the south . so . the force on the wire is towards the south .
then experiments show that zi zr since the incident ray . the reflected ray and the normal are all drawn on the paper . therefore . they lie in the plane of the paper .
a prism p . in the path of white light disperses it into various colours . the red rays are deviated least and the violet rays are deviated most . the prism p is placed on the right side with its refracting edge at the lower side . the second refracting surface of p . and the first refracting surface of p are parallel . the dispersion produced by p . is now neutralised by p . the colours recombine in prism p and a white image is seen on the screen .
 . types of energy sources and their characteristics the energy sources available can be divided into two types 
the maximum accommodation of a normal eye is reached when the object is at a distance of about cm from the eye . after this the ciliary muscles cannot make the eye lens more thick or more convex . so . an object placed at a distance of less than cm cannot be seen clearly by a normal eye because all the power of accommodation of the eye has already been exhausted . thus . a normal eye has a power of accommodation which enables objects as far as infinity and as close as cm to be focused on the retina . the power of accommodation of the eye for a person having normal vision normal eyesight is about dioptres .
os . poe doo e . na n ray goes from rarer to denser medium ni n . ray goes from denser to rarer medium ny nz . fig . . remember that optically denser does not mean greater mass density mass per unit volume . for example . kerosene is lighter than water it floats on water . but it has higher refractive index . that is . it is optically denser than water . when light goes from the optically rarer medium to the optically denser medium . it slows down and bends towards the normal . and when it goes from the denser medium to the rarer medium . it speeds up and bends away from the normal .
varieties there are four varieties of coal classified on the basis of carbon content . name carbon i peat ii lignite iii bituminous iv anthracite coal with higher carbon content delivers more energy . it makes anthracite as the best quality coal .
when a wire is moved in a magnetic field between the poles of a magnet . then the free electrons present in the wire experience a force . this force makes the electrons move along the wire . and the movement of these electrons produces current in the wire . we are spending energy from our body in moving the wire up and down in the magnetic field . so . it is the energy spent by us in moving the wire in the magnetic field which is getting converted into electrical energy in the wire and producing an electric current in the wire . thus . the movement of a wire in a magnetic field can produce electric current . so . we can generate electricity by moving a wire continuously in the magnetic field between the poles of a magnet . this principle is used in producing electricity through generators . a generator uses the movement or rotation of a rectangular coil of wire between the poles of a horseshoe magnet to produce an electric current or electricity . thus . the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction is used in the production of electricity by a generator .
moreover . linear magnification can be represented by the following equations size of the image v f v i m size of the objectu f f u where f is the focal length of the lens . the following points should be kept in mind while dealing with linear magnification . if the magnification of a lens is negative . then the image formed is inverted and real . . if the magnification of a lens is positive . then the image formed is erect and virtual . . since a concave lens always produces a virtual image . therefore . the magnification for a concave lens is always positive .
do you know tides are formed due to attraction of moon for the ocean water . it is not an indirect form of solar energy .
 . a ray of light passing through the focus or directed towards the principal focus . after reflection . becomes parallel to the principal axis . fig . a and b fig . a ray of light passing through the focus becomes parallel to the principal axis after reflection .
this rule is also called maxwell s corkscrew rule . suppose the tip of a rotating corkscrew or a screw advances in the direction of the current . then the direction of rotation of its handle or head gives the direction of the current .
advantages of wind energy a wind energy produces no smoke and no harmful gases . so this form of energy is pollution free or environment friendly .
recombination of colours of spectrum to give white light isaac newton was the first to use a glass prism to obtain the spectrum of sunlight . he tried to split the colours of the spectrum of white light further by using another similar prism . however . he could not get any more colours . he then placed a second identical prism in an inverted position with respect to the first prism . as shown in figure .
sign convention with spherical mirrors . we generally come across four distances parallel to and two distances perpendicular to the principal axis . each of these six distances has a particular mathematical quantity associated with it . these quantities are given in table . . table . distance quantity symbol from the pole to the object from the pole to the image from the pole to the focus from the pole to the centre height of the object height of the image object distance image distance focal length radius of curvature object height image height the above definitions of u and v are for a point object placed on the principal axis . if an object is placed away from the principal axis . u corresponds to the distance from the pole to the foot of the perpendicular drawn from the object to the principal axis . similarly . v corresponds to the distance from the pole to the foot of the perpendicular drawn from the image to the principal axis . the quantities h . and he are defined for a linear . extended object placed perpendicular to the principal axis . for finding a particular distance when some others are given . we need to assign these quantities u . v . f . r . ho . he positive or negative signs according to a fixed set of rules . or a convention . several conventions for the signs of these quantities are in use . we shall follow the cartesian coordinates convention the sign convention for the distances parallel to the principal axis is as follows . coordinate convention for u . v . f . r u . v . f and r are measured from the pole . if a distance is measured along the incident rays . the corresponding quantity is positive . if a distance is measured opposite to the incident rays . the corresponding quantity is negative . for example . in figure . a . the rays are incident from the left to the right . to measure the object distance we have to measure from the pole to the object . i . e . . from the right to the left . this
broadly . lenses are of the following types trar rarar biconvex lens equiconvex lens plano convex lens concavo convex lens r r k biconcave equiconcave plano concave lens lens convexo concave lens lens note for mirror . it is so because for an inverted image v is negative in case of mirrors while it is positive in case of lenses .
represented by drawing parallel straight field lines see figure . even the earth s magnetic field at a given place is uniform which consists of parallel straight field lines which run roughly from south geographical pole to north geographical pole . one end of the current carrying solenoid acts like a north pole n pole and the other end a south pole
ocean thermal energy ote heat energy of the sun is absorbed by the surface water of the sea or ocean which increases the temperature of upper layers while the temperature of the deeper layers of water is relatively low . the energy extracted due to difference in the temperature of water at the surface of sea and deep below the sea is called ocean thermal energy .
this means that if we join two resistances of ohms and ohms in parallel then their combined resistance is only ohms which is less than either of the two individual resistances of ohms and ohms . thus . when a number of resistances are connected in parallel then their combined resistance is less than the smallest individual resistance . this is due to the fact that when we have two or more resistances joined parallel to one another . then the same current gets additional paths to flow and the overall resistance decreases . before we derive a formula for the resultant resistance of a number of resistances connected in parallel . we should keep in mind that i when a number of resistances are connected in parallel . then the potential difference across each resistance is the same which is equal to the voltage of the battery applied . ii when a number of resistances connected in parallel are joined to the two terminals of a battery . then different amounts of current flow through each resistance which depends on the value of resistance . but the current flowing through all the individual parallel resistances . taken together . is equal to the current flowing in the circuit as a whole . thus . when a number of resistances are connected in parallel . then the sum of the currents flowing through all the resistances is equal to the total current flowing in the circuit .
disadvantages of generating hydroelectricity the production of hydroelectric power by constructing high rise dams on rivers has certain problems associated with it . some of these are given below .
and dim . again and again . and we say that the stars twinkle at night . the twinkling of a star is due to the atmospheric refraction of star s light . this can be explained as follows 
. w to a bulb lamp plug key off switch off resistor unconnected conductors ammeter oo h fuse plug key on ve or switch on variable resistor rheostat connected conductors fig . . some symbols used in circuit diagrams voltmeter a circuit may be represented by a diagram that uses symbols for the elements used in the circuit . showing how the elements are connected to each other . such a diagram is called a circuit diagram . in figure . . parts c and d are the circuit diagrams for the open and closed circuits shown in parts a and b of the figure . the bulb . cell and the plug key are represented by their symbols . some common circuit elements and their symbols are shown in figure . .
different types of images . for example . we can place the object i between the pole p and focus f see figure . ii at the focus f . iii between focus f and centre of curvature c . iv at the centre of curvature c . v beyond the centre of curvature c . and vi at far off distance called infinity this distance cannot be shown in the figure .
for a given v and t . the heat produced is inversely proportional to r . so . if the same potential difference is applied across two resistances . more heat will be produced in the smaller resistance .
 . . demerits of solar cells following are the demerits of the solar cell . irregular supply of solar energy . . not economical for power plants of mw rating . . need for storage batteries . . do not generate power during cloudy season or rainy season . . very low efficiency . only . availability of special grade silicon for making solar cells is limited . . use of silver to connect the solar cells increases the cost of the solar panel .
thus . the sky appears blue because the molecules in the air nitrogen and oxygen molecules scatter blue part of the sunlight much more than they scatter red light or other shades . please note that only a little of the blue light present
sign convention the quantities u . v . f are defined corresponding to the distance of the object . image and the second focus from the optical centre . if a distance is measured along the incident rays . the corresponding quantity is positive . if a distance is measured opposite to the incident rays . the corresponding quantity is negative . the object height h . is always taken as positive . if the image is formed on the same side of the principal axis erect image . the image height he is also positive . if the image is formed on the opposite side inverted image . he is negative . the focal length of a convex lens is positive . while that of a concave lens is negative . the power of a lens is defined as the reciprocal of its focal length . if f is in metres . power is in dioptres metre .
 . . how is hydroelectricity generated hydroelectric power generation is based on the following principle . the water flowing in rivers or in waterfalls is collected in dams . the water stored in the dam is then allowed to fall from the top of the dam . a water turbine is located at the bottom of the dam very deep inside the ground . the shaft of this water turbine is connected to a generator . when the water falls on the turbine at a high pressure . kinetic energy of flowing water rotates the water turbine which in turn rotates the armature or the coil of the generator . thereby producing electricity . the schematic diagram of a hydroelectric power plant is as shown in figure . .
the devices used to harness ocean thermal energy are called ocean thermal energy conversion power plants or otec power plants . a temperature difference of c or more between the surface water of ocean and deeper water is needed for operating otec power plants . in one type of otec power plant . the warm surface water of ocean is used to boil a liquid like ammonia or a chlorofluorocarbon cfc . the high pressure vapours of the liquid formed by boiling are then used to turn the turbine of a generator and produce electricity . the colder water from the deeper ocean is pumped up to cool the used up vapours and convert them again into a liquid . this process is repeated again and again .
fig . b flattening of sun s disc due to atmospheric refraction .
axis of rotation gro s slip rings output terminais brushes fig . line diagram of an ac generator .
numerical problems based on convex mirrors in order to solve the numerical problems based on convex mirrors . we should remember that the mirror formula for a convex mirror is the same as that for a concave mirror . which is v u f where v image distance u object distance and f focal length please note that since a convex mirror always forms an image behind the mirror on the right side of the mirror . therefore . the image distance v in the case of convex mirrors is always positive . the object is always placed to the left of mirror . so the object distance u is always taken with a negative sign . the focus of a convex mirror is behind the mirror on its right side . therefore . the focal length of a convex mirror is always taken as positive . the two magnification formulae for convex mirror are also just the same as that for a concave mirror . that is and m v where the symbols have their usual meaning . let us now solve one numerical problem based on convex mirror . m u
tyndall effect the scattering of light by particles in its path is called tyndall effect . when a beam of sunlight enters a dusty room through a window . then its path becomes visible to us . this is because the tiny dust particles present in the air of room scatter the beam of light all around the room . and when this scattered light enters our eyes . we can see the beam of light . thus . an example of tyndall effect is the way a beam of sunlight becomes visible as it passes through dust particles in the air of a room . tyndall effect can also be observed when sunlight passes through the canopy of a dense forest . here . tiny water droplets in the mist scatter sunlight see figure .
fixed dome type biogas plant description it has following sections i digester tank it is a well like structure made from bricks . its roof is dome shaped which acts as a fixed strong tank gas holder for biogas . a tapped outlet for biogas is provided at the top of the dome .
this led faraday to conclude that an electric current can be produced by changing the magnetic field flux . a current cannot be produced if the magnetic field flux does not change .
we will now discuss the signs for the heights of objects and images . an object is always placed above the principal axis in the upward direction . so the height of an object is always considered positive . on the other hand . an image can be formed above the principal axis or below the principal axis . if an image is formed above the principal axis . its height is taken as positive and if an image is formed below the principal axis . then its height is taken as negative . now . we know that all the virtual images are erect and are formed above the principal axis . so the height of all the virtual and erect images is considered positive . on the other hand . all the real images are inverted and they are formed below the principal axis . so the height of all the real and inverted images is taken as negative . we are now in a position to answer the following questions 
solar cells solar cells use the energy in sunlight to produce electricity . thus . solar cell is a device which converts solar energy or sun s energy directly into electricity . since solar energy is also called sunlight energy . so we can also say that a solar cell converts sunlight energy into electrical energy . we will now discuss the solar cell in somewhat detail .
 ii natural gas is used for cooking food and heating water . iii natural gas is used to produce electricity . iv natural gas is used for manufacturing fertilizers .
from the above discussion we conclude that the image formed in a wo conclude that the image formed in
activity take a large highly polished spoon . view your face in it . if you look closely at it . you will find that surface of the spoon curved inwards can be approximated to a concave mirror and the surface of the spoon bulged outwards can be approximated to a convex mirror fig . . the images formed in the first two cases are different . in the first case the image formed is inverted while in the second case it is erect .
efghi nopqrstuvwxyz magnifying glass fig . a convex lens forms a virtual and erect image when the object is placed between the optical centre and the focus . fig . a lens is being used to start a fire by focusing the sun s rays on a piece of paper . is the lens a diverging or converging lens 
the corpuscular theory of light was put forward by newton . this theory treats light as a particle called corpuscles .
ocean energy is another form of solar energy
the current produced by moving a straight wire in a magnetic field or by moving a magnet in a coil is called induced current . the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction was discovered by a british scientist michael faraday and an american scientist joseph henry independently in . the process of electromagnetic induction has led to the construction of generators for producing electricity at power stations . before we describe experiments to demonstrate the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction . we should know something about the galvanometer which we will be using now .
contact lens a contact lens is a small lens which is worn directly on the cornea . it has one clear advantage over spectacles . when a person wearing spectacles looks through the corner of the eye . the cornea and the centre of the lens are not in line . as a result . the peripheral view gets distorted . since a contact lens moves with the cornea . this problem does not arise . apart from this . some people may prefer contact lenses for cosmetic reasons .
 . isolated poles do not exist if a magnet is cut into small pieces each piece by itself is a magnet fig . . it follows that monopoles do not exist . if a magnet is cut parallel to its length . then its pole strength becomes half . if the magnet is cut perpendicular to its length . there is no change in its pole strength .
optic nerve it is a bundle of nerves originating from the brain and entering the eye ball from the posterior side . it attaches itself to the choroids . its function is to carry electrical signals to the brain .
the energy of wind is harnessed by using a windmill . a windmill consists of big sized . table fan like blades which are fixed over the top of a tall pole in such a way that they are free to rotate . when the fast moving wind strikes on the blades of windmill . it makes them rotate continuously . the rotatory motion of the windmill is then used to do mechanical work through a shaft connected to the rotating blades .
if we bring a plastic comb near some very tiny pieces of paper . it will not have any effect on them . if . however . the comb is first rubbed with dry hair and then brought near the tiny pieces of paper . we find that the comb now attracts the pieces of paper towards itself . these observations are explained by saying that initially the comb is electrically neutral so it has no effect on the tiny pieces of paper . when the comb is rubbed with dry hair . then it gets electric charge . this electrically charged comb exerts an electric force on the tiny pieces of paper and attracts them . similarly . a glass rod rubbed with silk cloth and an ebonite rod rubbed with woollen cloth also acquire
or metallic box . inside walls of the box are black painted . a plane mirror or reflector is attached to the box and its position is adjustable . it is provided with containers whose outer sides are black painted . a thick glass sheet covers the containers .
object an optical object is decided by incident rays only . it is of two kinds real object when the incident rays diverge in all the directions and the point of divergence gives the position of real object . virtual object when the incident rays converge at a point and the point of convergence gives the position of virtual object . real object virtual object note virtual object cannot be seen by human eye because for an object or image to be seen by eyes . rays received by eyes must be diverging .
lens formula and magnification formulae for a concave lens the lens formula for a concave lens is the same as that for a convex lens . which is the magnification formulae for a concave lens are also just the same as that for convex lens . which are m and m 
scattering of light when sunlight enters the atmosphere of the earth . the atoms and molecules of different gases present in the atmosphere absorb this light . then these atoms and molecules of the gases re emit light in all directions . this process is known as scattering of light .
broder sdele doble croberecolore phase neutral earth cddlebotostated posnertele decreto herbieredgreetbtchede dorsbeegoriesteder seite bettino ces gradbenze so b retourselenlergegestgee settings to date betongsangebotenea omaan seo ostatniegtan boss turgeois phase red neutral black earth green old system phase brown neutral blue earth green yellow new system fig . the old and the new system of colour convention for wires .
it should be noted that this case is just opposite of case no . which we have already discussed . there we studied that when the object is at focus of concave mirror . the image is formed at infinity and here we have seen that when the object is at infinity . the image is formed at the focus of concave mirror . this means that a concave mirror can concentrate all the parallel rays of light to its focus . suppose we have a concave mirror of focal length cm . then its focus f will be at a distance of cm
a spherical mirror is that mirror whose reflecting surface is the part of a hollow sphere of glass . the spherical mirrors are of two types concave mirrors . and convex mirrors .
directional property when a magnet is suspended freely it always comes to rest in north south direction .
consider the situation when the sun just below the horizon figure . . rays of light coming from it get bent such that to an observer they seem to be coming from above the horizon . thus . even when the sun s position is just below the horizon . the sun is visible to us . so . at sunrise we see the sun before it actually comes to the horizon . and at sunset we see it even after it has just dipped below the horizon . this increases daylight by about four minutes every day two minutes at sunrise and two minutes at sunset . atmosphere horizon sun bedded fig . . atmospheric refraction makes the sun visible even when the sun is just below the horizon .
an electromagnet acquires the magnetic properties only when an electric current is passed through the solenoid . once the current is switched off . it almost loses its magnetic properties as the retentivity the ability to retain magnetism of soft iron is very low . the strength of the electromagnet depends upon i the number of turns per unit length of the solenoid and ii the current through the solenoid .
consider three resistors of resistances r . r and rz connected in series to a cell of potential v as shown in figure . b . since the three resistors are connected in series . therefore . the current i through each of them is same .
working cow dung and water are mixed in equal proportions in mixing tank to form a slurry . the slurry goes into the inlet tank and the digester and fills about two third of the digester . the top is left empty for the collection of the biogas . new gas plants take about two months to start functioning . the cow dung undergoes fermentation by anaerobic bacteria to form biogas which gets collected in the dome . as the amount of gas collected in dome increases . it exerts pressure over the slurry and forces the spent slurry in the digester to go out into the outlet tank and from there to overflow tank . the spent slurry is rich in nitrogen and phosphorus compounds and forms a good manure . the biogas collected in the dome is taken out through the tapped outlet at the top . through a pipe provided with a gas control valve . it is then distributed as desired . once the gas plant starts functioning . more cattle dung slurry is added to the digester . a continuous supply of biogas can be obtained .
 b when object lies between infinity and the optical centre consider an object placed beyond the focus of the lens . two rays leave the lens one passes through the optical centre undeviated and the other which is parallel to the principal axis diverges after refraction from the lens . the two rays seem to meet between the focus and the optical centre on the same side as that of the object fig . . this gives the position of the image . . the image is formed between focus and the optical centre on the same side as that of the object . . the image is magnified . virtual and erect . . it is used in hand lens to read print and in spectacles for short sightedness .
when we talk of flowing water . we think of water flowing in rivers . streams . waterfalls . and so on . the flowing water has kinetic energy . the ultimate source of this energy is the sun . this is because the energy of the sun evaporates water . which forms clouds that cause rainfall or snowfall . the rain and melting snow feed rivers . etc . . whose flow we use . the energy of flowing water has been used for centuries to carry logs down rivers . to turn waterwheels to grind grain . run mills . and so on . water striking the blades of the waterwheel makes it rotate . this design was modified to make water turbines . which are used to generate electricity from flowing water .
the sunlight is made up of seven coloured lights mixed together . when sunlight passes through the atmosphere . most of the longer wavelength lights such as red . orange . yellow . etc . present in it do not get scattered much by the air molecules and hence pass straight through . the shorter wavelength blue light is . however . scattered all around the sky by air molecules in the atmosphere see figure . whichever direction we look . some of this scattered blue light enters our eyes . since we see the blue light from everywhere overhead . the sky looks blue .
refraction of light from a plane transparent surface n normal air low density angle of incidence incident ray in diagram . xy is section of a plane transparent surface of a denser medium . a ray of light pq strikes the surface at q and goes along qr in denser medium . it is bent towards normal . this bending of ray of light when it travel in different medium . is called refraction . the surface is said to have refracted the light . tant ray angle of refraction refracted ray n r
 . the human eye the human eye is one of the most valuable and sensitive sense organs in the human body . due to it we can see the wonderful world and the colours around us . on closing the eyes . we can identify objects to some extent by their smell . taste . sound they make or by touch . it is . however . impossible to identify colours while closing the eyes . thus . of all the sense organs . the human eye is the most significant one as it enables us to see the beautiful . colourful world around us .
figure shows how a convex lens is used as a projection lens for the purpose of projecting a magnified real image of a slide or a film on a screen . the slide or film is kept between f and f of a convex lens and illuminated by a source of light such as an electric lamp . a magnified image of the picture on the slide or film is produced on a screen placed on the other side of the convex lens .
a short time . the pupil of our eye expands and becomes large . more light then enters our eye and we can see clearly . on the other hand . if we go from a dark room into bright sunlight or switch on a bright lamp . then we feel the glare in our eyes . this is due to the fact that in a dark room . the pupil of our eye is large . so . when we go out from a dark room into bright sunlight or switch on a bright lamp . a large amount of light enters our eyes and we feel the glare . gradually . the pupil of our eye contracts . less light then enters our eye and we can see clearly . in this way . the iris also protects our eyes from the glare of bright lights .
 e shield the entire reactor core is enclosed in a heavy steel or concrete dome the shield to prevent the loss of heat and to protect the persons operating the reactor from radiation .
properties or characteristics of the magnetic field lines . the magnetic field lines originate from the north pole of a magnet and end at its south pole .
 . magnetic force on a current carrying conductor when a magnetic needle is brought near a current carrying conductor . the needle gets deflected i . e . . the magnetic field of the current carrying conductor exerts a force on the magnetic needle . andre marie ampere in found that a magnetic field exerts a force on a current carrying conductor and produces motion in it .
activity corner to study the magnetic field due to current in a circular coil . take a rectangular cardboard having two holes m and n . direction of current circular coil carrying current circular lines of force magnetic lines of force mythop variable resistance y battery rheostat magnetic field due to a current carrying coil
nature of image virtual . erect and extremely diminished virtual . erect and diminished
 iv beam a number of rays combined together is called a beam .
the colours in the spectrum do not have sharp boundaries in fact . they merge gradually into the next colour . each colour has a large number of tints shades . screen white red sunlight prism orange yellow green blue indigo violet spectrum fig . white light dispersed by a prism into the visible spectrum .
the distance of the focus from the pole is called the focal length of the spherical mirror .
as is clear from figure a and figure b . by using the split ring . the direction of induced current does not change in the external circuit throughout the complete rotation of the armature . in other words . the current in the external circuit always flows in the same direction . hence the induced current is unidirectional . i . e . . direct current dc .
procedure set up an electric circuit by connecting four dry cells of . v each in series with the ammeter . a key plug with thick connecting wires leaving a gap xy in the circuit as shown in figure . remove the key from the plug . now insert the nichrome wire in the gap xy . plug the key . the circuit is complete as the current starts flowing in the whole circuit . find the current flowing through the nichrome wire by measuring the reading of the ammeter .
associated terms
 . power of a lens different lenses bend the rays of light falling on it by different amounts . this ability of a lens is called its power . thus . power p of a lens is defined as its ability to converge or diverge a beam of light falling on it . mathematically . power is measured as the reciprocal of the focal length of a lens in metre . therefore . p f in metre 
anaerobic microorganisms . in the presence of water do the degradation of biomass in the digester of a biogas plant . in a fixed dome type biogas plant . the gas has to be removed from time to time to prevent excess gas pressures .
each other . the orientation of iron filings around a combination of south north and north north is as shown in figure . . te go se res brush sa sonido ce bresso de bro dell huduma es to fig . magnetic pattern between two unlike poles and between two like poles .
also consider a ray that is incident obliquely on the pole of the mirror . at the pole . the normal to the mirror is its principal axis . so . the principal axis will make equal angles with the incident and reflected rays law of reflection . using this . the reflected ray can be drawn .
concept map pracov scores biogas plants biogas plants are safe and useful way of waste disposal . use of biogas in rural areas leads to saving of firewood and reduces deforestation . slurry gas outlet manure thermal power plants fossil fuels are burnt to produce steam from water which further runs the turbine to generate electricity . thermal power plants are usually set up near coal or oil fields for the convenience of transportation . generator steam electricity water reservoir turbine fertiliser soil pas tank soil outlet furnace digester ssrespondance pod p redhovedsidades reports dos fossil fuels the combustible materials formed due to the decomposition of the remains of the prehistoric animals and plants inside the earth . for e . g . . natural gas . coal . petroleum conventional sources of energy which had been used since ancient times due to their easy availability . hydro power plants potential energy of water conventional and renewable source of energy stored in a dam is converted into kinetic energy of falling water and then . kinetic energy is converted into the electrical energy . non renewable sources those sources of energy which cannot be renewed or replaced . sources of energy renewable sources those sources of energy which can be renewed at short intervals of time . rossss ossos ros ssr go wind energy energy possessed by moving air . widely used in windmills to generate electricity geothermal energy heat of the interior of the earth . used in industrial processes . drying crops and hot water supply . electricity generation . so songs donossbordsssss non conventional sources of energy developed with appropriate technology input . s on solar energy the light and heat energies of sunlight are collectively called solar energy energy from ocean energy of sea wave tidal energy ocean thermal energy doosowowowod owodood mordordogn nuclear fission the phenomenon of splitting up of a heavy nucleus into lighter nuclei . on bombardment with slow speed neutrons . with the release of a large amount of energy is known as nuclear fission . nuclear energy the energy released during nuclear reaction . widely used in nuclear power plants nuclear reactors to generate electricity . nuclear fusion fusion of two nuclei of heavy hydrogen or deuterium h is h h he n . mev
the electricity generated by a single wind turbine is quite small because a single wind turbine can run only a small generator . so . in order to generate a large amount of electricity . a large number of wind turbines are erected over a big area of land . such a set up of having a large number of wind turbines working at a place to generate electrical energy on a large scale is called a wind energy farm see figure . the small electricity generated by each wind generator is combined together to obtain electricity on a large scale .
reflection from plane mirrors plane mirrors are commonly used as looking glasses . we use them while dressing . combing . and so on . a plane mirror is made from a glass plate . a few millimetres thick . one surface of the glass is polished to a high degree of smoothness . forming the front surface of the mirror . the back surface is silvered . i . e . . coated with a thin layer of silver . aluminium or some other shiny . opaque material . a coat of opaque paint behind this layer protects the silvering . when light from an object falls on the front surface . most of it enters the glass plate and falls on the silvered surface .
an ink dot appear to be raised . when covered by a glass plate . cm thick ans . here v m s . c x m s refractive index of glass . c x v x . real depth . cm . apparent depth real depth . u u . . cm distance through which the ink dot appears to be raised . . . cm .
 ii while rotating . when the coil reaches vertical position . then the brushes p and q will touch the gap between the two commutator rings and current to the coil is cut off . though the current to the coil is cut off when it is in the exact vertical position . the coil does not stop rotating because it has already gained momentum due to which it goes beyond the vertical position .
nuclear power plant if only one of the neutrons produced in each fission is able to cause further fission . then the process is slow and the energy is released steadily . such a chain reaction is called as controlled chain reaction . the energy released in this process can be utilized for peaceful purposes . this is actually what happens in nuclear reactors .
proof suppose a current i is sent through a conductor of resistance r for time t under a potential difference of v volt as shown in figure . . then charge flowing through the conductor is q it . the work done in taking q coulomb charge from one end of the conductor to the other end at a potential difference v is w v q joule . . . . w vit joule . . . . by ohm s law . we have v ir substituting in the above equation . we have or v w i²rt t w p . . . . r h hence . heat produced is given by . . w iºrt vét vit j jrji the above equations have calorie as their unit . however . in si units joule . heat energy is given by the relation . w e i²rt v vi
 . . coal coal is a mixture of compounds of carbon . hydrogen . oxygen and a small amount of nitrogen and sulphur . coal can either be used as a source of energy or can be converted into other forms of energy like coal gas . electricity and synthetic petroleum . it is still the most widely used fuel . the percentage of carbon in coal determines its quality . which also forms the basis of its use and its classification .
a simple a . c . generator consists of a rectangular coil abcd which can be rotated rapidly between the poles n and s of a strong horseshoe type permanent magnet m see figure . the coil is made of a large number of turns of insulated copper wire . the two ends a and d of the rectangular coil are connected to two circular pieces of copper metal called slip rings r and r . as the slip rings rị and r rotate with the coil . the two fixed pieces of carbon called carbon brushes . b and b . keep contact with them . so . the current produced in the rotating coil can be tapped out through slip rings into the carbon brushes . the outer ends of carbon brushes are connected to a galvanometer to show the flow of current in the external circuit which is produced by the generator .
 . this also happens due to refraction of light . as we will study in the next chapter . the stars appear to twinkle on a clear night due to the refraction of light in the atmosphere . before we go further and discuss the laws of refraction of light . please answer the following questions 
if w joules of work has to be done to move q coulombs of charge from one point to the other point . then the potential difference v between the two points is given by the formula my studygear potential difference . orio v where w work done and q quantity of charge moved
 . refraction of light when a ray of light travelling through a transparent medium encounters a boundary leading into another transparent medium . a part of the wave is reflected and a part enters the second medium . the ray that enters the second medium is bent at the boundary and is said to be refracted .
 mes fig . magnetic field pattern of a bar magnet as displayed by iron filings on a sheet of paper .
locations in india . places where petroleum oil is being extracted from oil wells are i assam rudrasagar and lakwa . ii bombay bombay high off shore areas . iii godavari and kaveri off shore deltas . iv gujarat ankleswar and kalol .
crystalline lens the crystalline lens merely provides the finer adjustment of focal length required to focus objects at different distance on the retina .
convex mirror its focus is situated behind the mirror . its radius of curvature and focal length are positive . the incident rays are reflected from its convex surface . its concave side is polished . the image distance is always positive . the image formed by it is erect and smaller . its field of view is broad . convex mirrors are used in night lamps on roads and as side mirrors in cars to view the vehicles behind .
nature of light there are two theories about the nature of light wave theory of light and particle theory of light . according to wave theory light consists of electromagnetic waves which do not require a material medium like solid . liquid or gas for their propagation . the wavelength of visible light waves is very small being only about x m to x m . the speed of light waves is very high being about metres per second in vacuum . according to particle theory light is composed of particles which travel in a straight line at very high speed . the elementary particle that defines light is the photon .
 this shows that prism does not produce any colour by itself . dispersion takes place at first face of the prism and afterwards at second prism it gets refracted only .
reflection from curved surfaces images can be formed by the reflection of light from smooth . curved surfaces like doorknobs . taps . utensils . etc . hold a large . shiny spoon in front of your face . in spoons . one curved surface is hollow while the other bulges out . depending on which surface of the spoon you are looking at . you will see different kinds of images of your face . let us find out a bit more about the images formed by the curved surfaces of spoons .
factors affecting the strength of an electromagnet . the strength of an electromagnet depends on . i the number of turns in the coil . if we increase the number of turns in the coil . the strength of electromagnet increases . ii the current flowing in the coil . if the current in the coil is increased . the strength of electromagnet increases .
do you know it is cheap and easy to construct a fixed dome type biogas plant because the material required is locally available in villages .
correcting near sightedness to correct near sightedness . a parallel beam is made divergent before it enters the eye . by putting a concave lens in front of the eye figure . c . the focal length of the concave lens is so chosen that divergent rays entering the eye focus on the retina . and they appear to come from o the far point of the unaided myopic eye .
in one type of otec power plants . a low melting point liquid or fluid such as ammonia volatile liquid or chlorofluorocarbon cfc is used to run the turbine of a generator . the warm surface water of ocean is used to boil the liquid like ammonia or cfc in a heat exchanger and vapours thus formed are used to drive the turbine of the generator . cold water from the depth of the ocean is pumped up to condense the vapours of the ammonia again to liquid . this ammonia is reused and the cycle repeats .
flow of charge consider two identical metallic spheres p and n . carrying equal amounts of positive and negative charges respectively figure . . a positive charge is to be taken from b to a . it is attracted by the negatively charged sphere n and repelled by the positively charged sphere p . so . to move the charge towards a . one has to apply a force on it towards the left . thus . the work done is positive . hence . the potential difference va vb is positive . this means và vb . as one moves towards p . the work done increases so . the potential increases . and on moving towards n . the potential decreases . so . the potential of p is higher than that of n . in general . the potential of a positively charged body is taken as higher than that of a negatively charged body . repulsion attraction fig . . what happens when a free to move charge is placed between the spheres a positive charge will move towards the negatively charged sphere . and a negative charge will move towards the positively charged sphere . that is . a free positive charge moves towards lower potential . and a free negative charge moves towards higher potential .
normal . . glass air n
working and theory of electric motor
 spherical mirrors a spherical mirror is a part of a sphere . the centre of this sphere is called the centre of curvature of the mirror . the central point of the surface of the mirror is called its pole . the line joining the pole and the centre of curvature is called the principal axis . the circular area that determines the amount of light falling on a mirror or a lens is called its aperture .
 iv which is safe to handle and use . and v which does not cause environmental pollution . the most common sources of energy available to us are the fuels . these are discussed below .
drive the various types of machines in homes and industry . electric motor is used in electric fans . washing machines . refrigerators . mixer and grinder . electric cars and many . many other appliances see figure . a common electric motor works on direct current . so . it is also called d . c . motor . which means a direct current motor . the electric motor which we are going to discuss now is actually a d . c . motor .
thermal power plants generated . of the total electricity produced in india in . the rest was generated by hydroelectric . . nuclear and renewable energy . power plants . in some thermal power plants . natural gas or oil is used as fuel . natural gas is mainly methane ch . it is the cleanest fossil fuel . producing lesser pollutants than other fossil fuels . that is why vehicles using compressed natural gas cng cause less pollution .
biomass the dead parts of plants and trees and the waste material of animals are called biomass . the wood has been used as a fuel for a long time . if we can ensure that enough trees are planted . a continuous supply of fire wood can be assured . you must also be familiar with the use of cow dung cakes as a fuel . given the large live stock population in india . this can also assure us a steady source of fuel . these fuels . however . do not produce much heat on burning and a lot of smoke is given out when they are burnt . therefore . technological inputs to improve the efficiency of these fuels are necessary . when wood is burnt in a limited supply of oxygen . water and volatile materials present in it get removed and charcoal is left behind as the residue . charcoal burns without flames . is comparatively smokeless and has a higher heat generation efficiency .
 or magnetic needle to point always in a particular direction north and south . the shape of the earth s magnetic field resembles that of an imaginary bar magnet of length one fifth of earth s diameter buried at its centre see figure . the south pole of earth s magnet is in the geographical north because it attracts the north pole of the suspended magnet . similarly . the north pole of earth s magnet is in the geographical south because it attracts the south pole of the suspended magnet . thus . there is a magnetic s pole near the geographical north . and a magnetic n pole near the geographical south . the positions of the earth s magnetic poles are not well defined on the globe . they are spread over an area . the axis of earth s magnet and the geographical axis do not coincide with each other . the axis of earth s
convex lens a lens having both spherical surfaces or one spherical surface and other plane surface such that it is thick in the middle and thin at the edges is known as convex lens . there are three types of convex lenses 
 in household supply . a fuse is always connected in live wire and not in the neutral wire under any circumstance . though it will melt even when connected with neutral wire . the electric appliance will continue to be in contact with the live wire . thus . when the electric appliance is touched . it will give shock .
 . magnetic field due to a solenoid the solenoid is a long coil containing a large number of close turns of insulated copper wire . figure shows a solenoid sn whose two ends are connected to a battery b through a switch x . when an electric current is passed through the solenoid . it produces a magnetic field around it . the magnetic field produced by a current carrying solenoid is shown in figure . the magnetic field produced by a current carrying solenoid is similar to the magnetic field produced by a bar magnet . please note that the lines of magnetic field pass through the solenoid and return to the other end as shown in figure . the magnetic field lines inside the solenoid are in the form of parallel straight lines . this indicates that the strength of magnetic field is the same at all the points inside the solenoid . if the strength of magnetic field is just the same in a region . it is said to be uniform magnetic field . thus . the magnetic field is uniform inside a current carrying solenoid . the uniform magnetic field inside the current carrying solenoid has been
k b fig . first and second focal points of a converging thin lens . the numerical value of f is positive .
that when the direction of movement of magnet changes . then the direction of current produced in the coil also changes . so . the current produced in this case is also alternating current or a . c .
since surfaces ab and cd are parallel and qr is the transversal . therefore . zmqr zqrm i . e . . applying snell s law at the surface ab . we have sin i n . sin ſi n now . applying snell s law at the surface cd . we have sin . . . . sin e n multiplying equations . and . . we have sin i sin ſų yng sin r . sin e n n . . . . 
for mirrors . the following results hold . u is ve . if the object is in front of the mirror . real object . u is ve . if the object is behind the mirror . virtual object . v is ve . if the image is in front of the mirror . real image . v is tve . if the image is behind the mirror . virtual image . focal length of a concave mirror is taken as ve . . focal length of a convex mirror is taken as ve . . for a real image . h is ve . . for a virtual image . h is ve .
the fixed dome plant is suitable for usage with sewage .
chlorofluorocarbon cfc is used as the working fluid . warm sea water is used to vaporize liquid ammonia in an evaporator . the expanding vapours of ammonia turn a turbine connected to a generator . then the vapours go to a condenser . there . cold sea water . pumped up from the deep . is used to liquefy the ammonia . this ammonia is reused . and the cycle goes on .
do you know if a generator has slip ring arrangement . alternating current is generated . if a generator has split ring arrangement . direct current is generated .
 . when the object lies beyond f consider two rays one moving parallel to the principal axis and the other passing through the optical centre . after refraction the two rays meet between f and f on the other side of the lens . thus . the image lies between f and f fig . .
you will find fine microscopic sulphur particles precipitating in about to minutes . as the sulphur particles begin to form . you can observe the blue light from the three sides of the glass tank . this is due to scattering of short wavelengths
the defect of eye called hypermetropia or long sightedness is caused i due to low converging power of eye lens because of its large focal length . or ii due to eye ball being too short . in some cases . the ciliary muscles attached to the eye lens become weak and cannot make the eye lens thicker to increase its converging power . so . due to the low converging power of eye lens in an eye suffering from hypermetropia . the image of nearby object is formed behind the retina and hence the eye cannot see it clearly . in other cases . in an eye suffering from hypermetropia . the eye ball is too short due to which the retina is at a smaller distance from the eve lens . this condition also results in the
electricity is indispensable to us . from the humble torch to the powerful computer . thousands of things we use every day need electricity to work . the source of all electricity is charge . as charge is the basis of all electrical phenomena . we often need to know the amount of charge on a body . it is measured in coulombs . the coulomb is the si unit of charge and its symbol is c . as you know . matter is generally made of protons . electrons and neutrons . each proton carries a charge of . x coulomb . and each electron carries an equal negative charge . neutrons do not carry any net charge . normally . a body has equal number of protons and electrons . and is therefore . electrically neutral . however . in certain situations . the balance of charges in a body is disturbed . for example . when a glass rod is rubbed with a silk cloth . some electrons get transferred from the glass rod to the silk . the silk cloth . which gains electrons . becomes negatively charged . and the glass rod . which is left with more protons than electrons . becomes positively charged . charged particles or objects can exert forces on each other . while like similar charges repel each other . unlike charges attract . another important thing about charged particles is that they can flow . i . e . . they can move in a particular direction . this flow of charged particles is called an electric current . charged particles such as electrons are present in all substances . but . they do not flow on their own . for flow of charges . there has to be a potential difference .
 . refraction through a rectangular glass slab a common use of a transparent material . such as glass . is for windows . a window pane consists of a plate of glass with parallel surfaces . it acts as a rectangular glass slab . when a ray of light passes through the glass slab . the emergent ray is parallel to the incident ray . but displaced from it . as figure . shows .
location of coal mines in india . places where coal is mainly found . are i bihar and jharkhand ii madhya pradesh and chhattisgarh iii orissa iv west bengal .
 u f mo jr r where u refractive index of the material of the lens . mo refractive index of the medium . r and r be the radii of curvature of the two lens . r r r₂ar . о
limitations of using biogas as a fuel biogas plants cannot be set up in the cities as quite a large space is required for its set up . moreover getting dung to run the plant is not viable in cities . some families may not be able to afford the cost of construction of plant . to overcome the problem of cost and to ensure the availability of dung for the running of plant . it is advisable to set up community biogas plant in which cost of construction as well as the raw material bio waste is shared by several families .
resistivity we found that for a given material . resistance is i inversely proportional to the area of cross section . and ii directly proportional to length . combining i and ii . r of or r p a . . here . p is a constant for a given material at a given temperature . it is called the resistivity of the material . the resistivity of a material is the resistance per unit length of a unit cross section of the
the image formed by a concave mirror is not always real . figure . shows such a case . as usual . we have chosen two rays ad . parallel to the principal axis . and ae . passing through the centre of curvature . after reflection . ad passes through f . and ae retraces its path . you will notice that the reflected rays diverge . so they can never actually intersect . however . if they are produced backwards . they meet at a . where the virtual image of a is formed .
ę between the pole p and f behind the mirror virtual . enlarged . erect one can also say that the image is formed behind the mirror and is virtual and erect in this case . in fact . this is more practical from the observer s point of view .
s . no components i an electric cell ii a battery or a combination of cells iii plug key or switch open iv plug key or switch closed v a wire joint vi wires crossing without joining vii electric bulb viii a resistor of resistance r ix variable resistance or rheostat x ammeter xi voltmeter
biogas plant a biogas plant has a digester in which the biomass is decomposed . a mixing tank for mixing the biomass with water . an outflow tank and a means of collecting gas . the biomass . e . g . . cattle dung . is mixed with water in the mixing tank to form slurry . the slurry from this tank flows into the digester . which is a sealed chamber . the biomass decomposes here and expands . and the gas produced presses down the slurry . this causes the spent slurry to overflow into the outflow tank . the spent slurry is used as manure . the upper part of the digester has an outlet for gas . to prevent excessive pressure build up . the gas is removed from time to time .
 . secondary energy sources solar energy . wind energy . water energy are some examples of secondary energy sources . they are the sources that provide us energy free of cost .
the angle of incidence is the angle made by the incident ray with the normal at the point of incidence . in other words . the angle between the incident ray and normal is called the angle of incidence . in figure . the incident ray is ao and the normal is on . so the angle aon is the angle of incidence . the angle of incidence is denoted by the letter i . the angle of reflection is the angle made by the reflected ray with the normal at the point of incidence .
white light is a mixture of seven colours . every colours has its own characteristic wavelength . wavelength of different colours are given in the table . colour wavelength s . no . violet å indigo å blue å green å yellow å orange å red å
charge flows in a circuit due to difference in potentials between the two bodies in contact . positive charge flows from a body at higher potential to a body at lower potential and negative charge flows from a body at a lower potential to a body at higher potential . electric potential difference between two points in an electric circuit carrying some current is the work done to move a unit positive charge from one point to the other . work done in moving a charge in the electric field of another charge is given by . w q v joule volt coulomb
solar radiations solar radiation solar cell panel on ann a n . upper contact grid í silicon n type . silicon p type battery electrical contact load a b solar cell the electricity produced by solar panels is stored by using it to charge storage batteries . these charged batteries later on provide direct current d . c . for operating appliances .
between c and f re between c and infinity inverted gieogo 
rule . a ray of light going towards the focus of a convex mirror becomes parallel to the principal axis after reflection . this is just the reverse case of the first rule and it is shown in figure . here the incident ray of light ae is going towards the focus f of the convex mirror . it strikes the mirror surface at point e and gets reflected . after reflection . it becomes parallel to the principal axis and goes in the direction eg see figure .
these sign conventions are shown diagrammatically in figure . . m object on the left direction of incident light a height upwards ve distance towards the left ve distance towards the right ve ab height
electric fuse the electric wires used in domestic wiring are made of made of copper metal because copper is a good conductor of electricity having very low resistance . now . the copper wires chosen for household wiring are of such thickness so as to allow a certain
the thin eye lens is not powerful enough to converge the diverging light rays coming from the nearby objects onto the retina . so . to look at the nearby objects . the eye lens has to change its shape and become thick or more convex to increase its converging power . this happens as follows 
rule . a ray of light passing through the focus of a concave mirror becomes parallel to the principal axis after reflection . this rule is just the reverse case of the first rule and it is shown in figure . here . the incident ray ae is passing through the focus f of the concave mirror . it strikes the mirror surface at point e and gets reflected . after reflection . it becomes parallel to the axis and goes in the direction eg .
n d repeat the same process for the other side to get points a . b . c . d . e . f . g and hľ . on joining the points we get the magnetic lines of force . similarly . we can draw other magnetic field lines . the overall picture of magnetic field lines is as shown in the figure .
table electrical resistivity of some substances
 ii the rays of light coming from a nearby object are diverging or spreading out when they reach the eye see figure b . the diverging rays coming from a nearby object need a convex eye lens of high converging power to converge them or focus them to form an image on the retina of the eye . the convex eye lens of high converging power is the one having a short focal length and it is quite thick . keeping these points in mind . it will now be easy for us to understand the power of accommodation of the eye .
aperture the diameter of the mirror is called aperture of the mirror . in figures . ab represents the aperture of the mirror .
properties of charge a like charges repel and unlike charges attract each other . b a heavily charged body attracts other uncharged small particles . c the total charge of an isolated physical system is always conserved . d the exchange of charge . in any physical process . can be an integral multiples of electronic charge and not in its fraction . if q is the net charge due to accumulation of electrons or removal of electrons . then . q ne where n is an integer and e magnitude of charge on electron i . e . . . x c . e charge can neither be created nor be destroyed . rather than these can be transferred from one body to another .
fusion reactions release energy for the same reason as fission reactions . a typical fusion reactions is h h he mev ded
in this way we have located the images of the top point a and bottom point b of the object . now . each point of the object or arrow between a and b will give a point image which will lie between the points a and b . so . to get the complete image of object ab . we join the points a and b by a dotted line . thus . a b 
note mirror equation is valid for both type of mirrors and for any type of object irrespective of its positions . in case of spherical mirrors if object distance x and image distance x are measured from focus instead of pole . then u f xy and v f x the mirror formula reduces to i or xzx f² f x f x f which is known as newton s formula . this formula is applicable to real objects and real images . in numerical problems it is convenient to use mirror equation in following form v uf u uff uv u f v f u v
electric power the rate at which energy is used by an electrical appliance is called the electric power of that appliance . therefore . power work time or power energy time power v or p . where w i²rt vit or p ipr in terms of i and r v or p in terms of v and r or p vxi in terms of v and l s . i . unit of power is watt w . power is a scalar quantity .
another important factor in scattering of light is relative size of the scatterers say x compared to the wavelength of light a . for x . i . e . . when size of scatterer is much less than the wavelength of light . rayleigh scattering is valid . according to rayleigh scattering . intensity of light scattered ac however . when x à . i . e . . size of scatterer is much larger than the wavelength of light . rayleigh scattering is not valid . in that event . all wavelengths are scattered nearly equal . these conclusions regarding the scattering of light have been verified experimentally by tyndall .
mathematical relations t ohm s law v ir r p a
the regular reflection of light from a smooth surface can be explained as follows all the particles of a smooth surface like a plane mirror are facing in one direction . due to this the angle of incidence for all the parallel rays of light falling on a smooth surface is the same and hence the angle of reflection for all the rays of light is also the same . since the angle of incidence and the angle of reflection are the same or equal . a beam of parallel rays of light falling on a smooth surface is reflected as a beam of parallel light rays in one direction only see figure .
by saying that the object is between f and f . we mean that the object is at a distance greater than focal length f but less than twice the focal length f . so . whether we say that the object is between f and f or between fand f . it means the same thing . figure shows an object ab placed between f and f of a convex lens . a ray of light ad which is parallel to the principal axis passes through the focus f after refraction and goes in the direction df see figure . another ray of light ac passing through the centre c of the lens goes straight and meets the first refracted ray at point a on the right side of the lens . thus . a is the real image of point a of the object . draw a b perpendicular to the axis to get the complete image a b . if we place a screen at b . we can receive the image a b on the screen . it should be noted
motional electromotive force when a conducting rod moves in an external magnetic field in such a way it cuts the field . so all the free electrons in the rod transfer from one end to another end c to d and emf is induced in the rod . this emf is known as motional emf . emf induced within dĩ de lüx b dl net emf across the rod . e üxb . dſ ubl sin e induced electric field in the rod . d ēin ū x b b xū if any two out of ū . b and dſ become parallel or antiparallel . ε will become zero . some special cases for motional emf b if i . e . ū . band ī are perpendicular to each ffm at equilibrium other . fe fm and induced emf e blu d e max bvl of
a coil is made by winding several turns of insulated wire in a circular form . when a current passes through a coil . each turn produces its own magnetic field . these fields together give rise to a net magnetic field that is stronger than that produced by a circular loop of single turn . if a coil has n turns . the magnetic field due to the coil is n times stronger than that due to a single turn . in fact . the strength of the magnetic field due to a current carrying circular coil is proportional to the number of turns and the current . the direction of the magnetic field b at a point on the axis of a current carrying circular coil or a loop a can be found from the following right hand thumb rule . if the fingers of the right hand are curled along the direction of the current in a loop . the stretched thumb gives the direction of the magnetic field figure . .
fig . a when there is no relative motion between the coil of the wire and the bar magnet . there is no current in the coil . b a current is induced in the coil when the magnet moves towards the coil . c a current also exists when the magnet moves away from the coil . but the direction of current is opposite to that in b .
magnetic field due to a solenoid when a long insulated wire is tightly wound in the shape of a spring . with closely spaced turns that lie side by side . we get a solenoid figure . a . generally . a solenoid is made by winding wire over a nonconducting cylindrical tube . a solenoid differs from a circular coil in that the length of the solenoid is much greater than its diameter . when a current enters a solenoid at one end . it passes through each turn before coming out at the other end . each turn produces its own magnetic field . the net magnetic field is as represented by the magnetic field lines in figure . b . note that the pattern of field lines outside the solenoid is similar to that of a bar magnet figure . b . actually . a current carrying solenoid behaves like a bar magnet of the same shape . it also has opposite poles at its ends . the magnetic field inside a long current carrying solenoid is nearly uniform and is parallel to the axis of the solenoid . this is true for the inner part of the solenoid . away from the ends . near the ends the magnetic field decreases . imagine holding the solenoid in your right hand . with the fingers curled along the direction of the current . the direction of the thumb then gives the direction of the magnetic field . it also points towards the end where the north pole of the solenoid appears . another way of finding the north pole of a solenoid is to check which end gets repelled by the north pole of a bar magnet . how are the fields of a current carrying solenoid and coil different the field inside a current carrying solenoid is quite uniform for the most part . it only decreases near the ends . the field of a current carrying coil is not uniform . it changes with distance from the centre .
 . . series combination of resistors a number of resistors are said to be connected in series if . there is only one path for current to flow between two points . . the resistors are connected one after the other . . the current through each resistor is same . . the resistors have only one common point per pair . resistors are combined either in series or in parallel .
c f . fig . a convex lens converges light hence it is also called a converging lens . fig . a parallel laser beam is converged by a convex lens .
phase or live wire se electric meter pole fuse main fuse earth wire neutral wire main switch to domestic electric circuit
first focal plane concave first focal lens plane convex lens kf
 . lenses as prisms the action of a lens can be understood by treating it as a combination of a number of prisms most cut off . each of which bends the ray towards its base as shown in figure . . the centre of the lens acts as a simple parallel . sided glass slab .
construction these days solar cells are usually made from semi conductor materials likes silicon and gallium selenium with germanium are also used . semi conductors are made impure by adding to them some suitable impurities in suitable amount . these impure semi conductors have more conductivity . thin layers wafers of the two impure semi conductors are arranged in such a way that when sun light falls on them . a potential difference is developed between the two regions junction of the wafers . this potential difference produces electric current . cm² cm cm sized cell produces a potential difference of . volt to . volt and generates a current of milli ampere ma .
is called the angle of emergence . in figure . the angle ni bc is the angle of emergence . since the incident ray ao and the emergent ray bc are parallel to one another . so the angle of emergence e is equal to the angle of incidence i . please note that if a beam of light travelling in air passes into water and and then emerges into air . we will get a ray diagram similar to that shown in figure . draw it yourself by writing water in place of glass .
 . myopia short sightedness or near sightedness a short sighted person means that the short sight of the person to see nearby objects is normal but his long sight to see distant objects is defective . myopia or short sightedness is that defect of vision due to which a person cannot see the distant objects clearly though he can see the nearby objects clearly . for example . a child having the defect called myopia or short sightedness and sitting on the back benches in the class cannot read the writing on blackboard clearly though he can read his book comfortably . the far point of an eye suffering from myopia is less than infinity . such a person can see clearly only up to a distance of few metres or even less .
 . . fleming s left hand rule fleming s left hand rule states stretch out the forefinger . middle finger and the thumb perpendicular to each other as shown in figure . . if the forefinger gives the direction of the magnetic field . the middle finger the direction of current . then the thumb will give the direction of the force experienced by the current carrying conductor remember this rule by remembering fbi or father . mother . child .
nuclear waste may also include wastes during mining and enrichment of nuclear fuels . at the moment . disposal of nuclear waste is a big problem being faced by nuclear scientists . these nuclear wastes are being stored in thick steel containers keeping into mind that they will be disposed whenever safe methods of disposal are found out or will be used whenever the use of these wastes will be discovered
a concave mirror has a real focus whereas a convex mirror has a virtual focus . for spherical mirrors .
note a convex mirror always forms a virtual and erect image . no matter where in front of the mirror the object is placed . the image is always situated between the pole and the focus . irrespective of the position of the object in front of the mirror . cast
principle of a motor an electric motor utilises the magnetic effect of current . a motor works on the principle that when a rectangular coil is placed in a magnetic field and current is passed through it . a force acts on the coil which rotates it continuously . when the coil rotates . the shaft attached to it also rotates . in this way the electrical energy supplied to the motor is converted into the mechanical energy of rotation .
 b control rods rods made up of material such as cadmium or boron suspended between the fuel rods control the fission process by absorbing neutrons . these control rods regulate the flow of neutrons by lowering or rising up to keep the reaction chain self sustaining . while preventing the reactor core from overheating .
it should be clearly noted that the fleming s right hand rule is applied when we are given . i the direction of magnetic field and ii the direction of motion of the conductor and we are to find the direction of the induced current .
two results . when light travels from one medium into another its speed changes . the change in speed is due to the change in its wavelength . the frequency of light does not change during this process . . when a ray of light travels from an optically rarer into an optically denser medium its wavelength decreases and vice versa . the wavelength of light in a medium is given by the expression . am wavelength of light in air refractive index of medium the table . gives the absolute refractive index of several media . this refractive index is for yellow light .
the above equation is a mathematical expression of ohm s law . equation can be written in words as follows potential difference constant called resistance current we find that the ratio of potential difference applied between the ends of a conductor and the current flowing through it is a constant quantity called resistance . we have just seen that r m studygear v i x r or or ode so . current . i it is obvious from this relation that i the current is directly proportional to potential difference . and ii the current is inversely proportional to resistance .
images formed by a concave lens figure . shows the ray diagram of an image formed by a concave lens . the image is formed between the optical centre and the focus . and it is always virtual . erect and smaller than the object . for all positions of a real object . table . summarizes image formation by a concave lens . b image virtual . erect and diminished central line of the lens fig . . table . images formed by a concave lens position of the position of the object image at infinity at f nature and size virtual . point sized between infinity and o between f and o virtual . erect and smaller 
let ab be an object placed perpendicular to the principal axis figure . . with point a on the principal axis . locate the image b of the point b of the object . we know that the image of a will be formed on the principal axis . drop a perpendicular b a from b to the principal axis . a is the image of a . and a b is the image of ab . in figure . a . the image . in relation to the object . is on the opposite side of the principal axis . such an image is called an inverted image . and an image formed on the same side of the principal axis is called anerect image . as in figure . b .
environmental consequences exploiting any source of energy disturbs the environment in some way or the other . in any given situation . the source we would choose depends on factors such as the ease of extracting energy from that source . the economics of extracting energy from the source . the efficiency of the technology available and the environmental damage that will be caused by using that source .
since anaerobic microorganisms do not require oxygen . therefore . the digesters are designed as sealed chambers .
the resistivity of a material is numerically equal to the resistance of a conductor of this material of unit length t length and unit cross sectional area . both resistance and resistivity vary with temperature . the resistivity does not change if the shape or size of the resistor is changed . silver has the minimum value of resistivity . therefore . it is the best conductor of electricity . mica . rubber . ebonite . glass have a very high value of resistivity . therefore . they are very bad conductors of electricity . alloys are used in electric heating devices due to their high resistivity and low temperature coefficient of resistance . some alloys are manganin . constantan . nichrome .
yellow spot it is situated at the centre of the retina . it is a slightly raised spot with a minute depression in its peak . it is yellow in colour and most sensitive to light . the central region of the yellow spot is called the fovea centalis .
image is formed at the focus according to the ray diagram shown in figure on page . and before we conclude this discussion . here is a summary of the images formed by a convex mirror . summary of the images formed by a convex mirror position of object position of image size of image nature of image . anywhere between behind the mirror diminished virtual and erect pole p and infinity between p and f . at infinity behind the mirror highly diminished virtual and erect at focus f 
rule . a ray of light going towards the centre of curvature of a convex mirror is reflected back along the same path . this is shown in figure . in figure . the ray of light ad is going towards the centre of curvature c of a convex mirror . it strikes the mirror surface at point d and gets reflected back along the same path da . to a person on the left side . the reflected ray da appears to be coming from the centre of curvature c as shown by dotted line behind the mirror . please note that the ray ad gets reflected back along the same path because it falls normally or perpendicularly on the mirror surface at point d .
the copper tubes are also painted black from outside . note that more the number of coil of copper tube . hotter will the water become . the box is also covered with a glass sheet to prevent loss of heat . the two ends of the copper tubes are joined to a water storage tank d . the entire assembly is placed on the roof of the house or a building .
the brushes in an ac gene the br rator remain in contact with the same brush . the emf in an ac generator changes direction after every half cycle of the armature . in india . the frequency of voltage is hz .
a magnetic field exerts a force on a current carrying conductor we have seen that an electric current produces a magnetic field . which exerts force on a magnet placed near it . what happens when a current carrying wire is placed in a magnetic field such as that due to a permanent magnet let us find out .
limited supply of oxygen . water and volatile materials present in it get removed and charcoal is left behind as the residue . charcoal burns without flames . is comparatively smokeless and has a higher heat generation efficiency . biomass has been a traditional source of heat . for example . wood . crop residues . bagasse are burnt to produce heat for domestic . as well as industrial purposes . biomass is also utilised to produce electricity .
generally the potential difference applied to the electrical appliance is the same as that of the mains v in india and v in usa . canada etc . the wattage of an electrical appliance is the rate at which it consumes electrical energy under the rated voltage .
reflects the light . most of the objects reflect light which falls on them . some objects reflect more light whereas other objects reflect less light . the objects having polished . shining surfaces reflect more light than objects having unpolished . dull surfaces .
beam a bundle or bunch of rays is called a beam . it is of following three types o convergent beam it is a beam in which diameter of beam decreases in the direction of ray . divergent beam it is a beam in which all the rays meet at a point when produced backward and the diameter of beam goes on increasing as the rays proceed forwards .
other units smaller units milli volt mv v bigger units kilo volt kv v mega volt mv v
when the same eye has to look at a nearby object . the ciliary muscles of the eyes contract . the contracted ciliary muscles make the suspensory ligaments loose . when the suspensory ligaments become loose . they stop pulling the eye lens . the eye lens bulges under its own elasticity and becomes thick or more convex see figure b . the thick eye lens has small focal length but its converging power is large . since the converging power of eye lens increases . the thick eye lens can converge the diverging light rays coming from the nearby object to form an image on the retina of the eye . this is shown in figure b in which an object o is near to the eye . it has been focused by the thick eye lens to form an image i on the retina . when the eye lens becomes more convex to focus the nearby objects . the eye is said to be accommodated . we can now say that the ability of an eye to focus the distant objects as well as the nearby objects on the retina by changing the focal length or converging power of its lens is called accommodation .
 . resultant resistance of two resistances connected in series
in a metal . the flow of negative charges constitutes the current . an electric current can also be a flow of positive charges . so . a flow of charge is called an electric current . by convention . the direction of current is taken as the direction of flow of positive charges . thus . the direction of current is opposite to the direction of flow of negative charges . so . when a wire is connected to a cell . the current in the wire is from the positive terminal end to the negative terminal end .
consider a metallic wire acb connected across a cell of potential difference v . since the end a is connected to the positive terminal . it is at a higher potential than the end b . in metals . some electrons are loosely bound to the atoms . and can move within it . these are called free electrons . in the metallic wire . these electrons negative charges move from the low potential side b to the high potential side a . after reaching a . they enter the cell . the chemical reactions in the cell drive these electrons to the negative terminal . from there . they re enter the wire at the end b . thus . there is a continuous flow of electrons in the wire from b to c to a . we say that there is an electric current in the wire .
red violet fig . formation of a rainbow . att tre te fig . a rainbow .
 a fuel rods the fuel of the nuclear reactor is a fissionable substance such as u . typically . u is enriched to about and then used in the form of rods or pallets . these enriched uranium rods are encased in zirconium or stainless steel vessel .
now . for a virtual image h is positive and hy is also positive . so the magnification of a virtual and erect image is always positive . in other words . if the magnification has a plus sign . then the image is virtual and erect . for a real image . hy is negative and hy is positive . so the magnification for a real and inverted image is always negative . in other words . if the magnification has a minus sign . then the image is real and inverted .
please note that the lenses convex lens and concave lens work on the refraction of light through them .
 ii all distances are measured parallel to the principal axis and from the pole of the mirror .
earth w ire ouvertes hool error n oot live wire on v neutral wire electricity board s meter electricity meter distribution box containing main switch and fuses for each circuit fig . schematic diagram showing the distribution of electricity in different rooms .
 . . . advantages of biogas . biogas is an excellent fuel as it contains upto of methane . . it burns without smoke . leaves no residue like ash in wood . charcoal and coal burning . biogas has a large calorific value . . biogas can be supplied directly through pipes and hence has no storage problems . . it is a renewable source of energy . although fossil fuels are the main fuels for power plants . however . they will eventually get exhausted in the next century . therefore . other systems
a ray of light passing through the optical centre of the lens after refraction passes undeviated .
fleming s left hand rule for the direction of force when a current carrying wire is placed in a magnetic field . a force is exerted on the wire . fleming gave a simple rule to determine the direction of force acting on a current carrying wire placed in a magnetic field . this rule is known as fleming s left hand rule and it can be stated as follows . according to fleming s left hand rule hold the forefinger . the centre finger and the thumb of your left hand at right angles to one another as shown in figure a . adjust your hand in such a way that the forefinger points in the direction of magnetic field and the centre finger points in the direction of current . then the direction in which thumb points . gives the direction of force acting on the conductor . since the conductor say . a wire moves along the direction in which the force acts on it . we can also say that the direction in which
direction of magnetic field produced by straight current carrying conductor straight current carrying wire if the direction of current is known . then the direction of magnetic field produced by a straight wire carrying current can be obtained by using maxwell s right hand thumb rule . according to maxwell s right hand thumb rule imagine that you are grasping or holding the current carrying wire in your right
 . to demonstrate electromagnetic induction by using a straight wire and a horseshoe type magnet in figure a . we have a straight wire ab held between the poles n and s of a horseshoe magnet which is a u shaped magnet . the two ends of wire are connected to a current detecting instrument called galvanometer . when the wire ab is held standstill between the poles of the horseshoe magnet . then there is no deflection in the galvanometer pointer . this shows that no current is produced in the wire when it is held stationary in the magnetic field .
we will now give some important points about the fuse wire to be used in electrical circuits . first of all we should know why we use a thin wire as a fuse wire and not a thick wire . we use a thin wire in a fuse because it has a much greater resistance than the rest of connecting wires . due to its high resistance . the heating effect of current will be much more in the fuse wire than anywhere else in the circuit . this will melt the fuse wire whereas other wiring will remain safe . we should not use a thick wire as a fuse wire because it will have a low resistance and hence it will not get heated to its melting point easily . the fuse wire is usually made from tin plated copper wire having low melting point so that it may melt easily . a pure copper wire cannot be used as a fuse wire because it has a high melting point due to which it will not melt easily when a short circuit takes place .
 . natural and artificial magnets all magnets can be classified into two types i natural and ii artificial or man made
advantages of solar energy a it is available everywhere . b it is available in plenty renewable . and it is free . c it does not cause pollution .
the resistance of a conductor depends on length . thickness . nature of material and temperature . of the conductor . a long wire or conductor has more resistance and a short wire has less resistance . again . a thick wire has less resistance whereas a thin wire has more resistance . rise in temperature of a wire or conductor increases its resistance .
downward force on it whereas the side ab is now on the right side with an upward force on it . due to this the side cd of the coil is pushed down and the side ab of coil is pushed up . this makes the coil rotate anticlockwise by another half rotation . iv the reversing of current in the coil is repeated after every half rotation due to which the coil and its shaft continue to rotate as long as current from the battery is passed through it . the rotating shaft of electric motor can drive a large number of machines which are connected to it . it should be noted that the current flowing in the other two sides . ad and bc of the rectangular coil is
lens formula sign convention for lenses the equation relating the object distance u . the image distance v and the focal length f . is called the lens formula . it is expressed as v u f this formula is valid in all situations for any spherical lens . take proper care of the signs of different quantities . while putting numerical values for solving problems related to lenses . od 
going from water to air . thus . an eye at position e sees the end o of the stick at position i which is nearer to the water surface .
in outer space . the sky looks dark and black instead of blue . this is because there is no atmosphere containing air in the outer space to scatter sunlight . since there is no scattered light to reach our eyes in outer space . therefore . the sky looks dark and black there . this is why the astronauts who go to outer space find the sky to be dark and black instead of blue .
 e battery a battery is connected across the carbon brushes . this battery supplies the current to the armature coil .
the short form to remember the colours of the spectrum is to remember vibgyor . violet light is deviated most . and red is deviated least .
power of a lens a convex lens converges brings closer and a concave lens diverges spreads the light rays incident on it . more is the convergence or divergence produced by a lens . more powerful the lens is said to be . it is the
at any given time . we will use only two of the above three types of light rays to draw the ray diagrams to find the position of image formed by a concave lens .
release of energy when the coal is burnt . the carbon present in it reacts with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide . a lot of heat is also produced because the reaction is exothermic .
equivalent resistance in series connection figure . a shows three resistors of resistances r . r and r connected in series . the cell connected across the combination maintains a potential difference v across the combination . the current through the cell is i . the same current i flows through each resistor . let us replace the combination of resistors by a single resistor reg such that the current does not change . i . e . . it remains i figure . b . this resistance is called the equivalent resistance of the combination . and its value is given by ohm s law as req v i .
note that the same experiment can be carried out by plotting magnetic field lines using a compass .
angle of reflection the angle that the reflected ray makes with the normal . is called the angle of reflection . it is represented by the symbol r . qon is the angle of reflection .
conclusion we know that the electric current is the flow of electrons through a conductor . the electrons . however . are not completely free to move in a conductor . when the electrons move from one part of the conductor to the other part . they collide with other electrons and with the positive ions protons present in the conductor . these collisions slow down the speed of electrons . this property of the conductor by virtue of which it opposes the flow of electrons electric current through it is called electric resistance . in this activity . every conductor . i . e . nichrome wire . torch bulb . w bulb offered resistance to the electric current but to a different extent . so . we observed that the current flowing through the circuit was different for different components .
spherical mirrors spherical mirrors are special types of curved mirrors in which the surface of the mirror is a part of a sphere . the rear view mirrors in cars . scooters . etc . . are spherical mirrors . they can be thought of as being made from a portion cut off from a hollow glass sphere figure . . such a portion has
causes of myopia the two possible causes of this defect are increase in the length of the eye ball . as if distance of retina from the eye lens has increased excessive curvature of the eye lens .
the thickness of a wire is usually represented by its diameter . it can be shown by calculations that the resistance of a wire is inversely proportional to the square of its diameter . thus . when the diameter of a wire is doubled made times . its resistance becomes one fourth . and if the diameter of the wire is halved made . then its resistance becomes four times times . similarly . if the diameter of a wire is tripled made times . then its resistance will become or th of its original value .
this reasoning can be applied to all the points which make up the bottom pq of the pool . so that due to refraction of light . the bottom pq of the pool will appear to be much nearer at the position p q see figure . due to this . the pool of water will appear less deep than it actually is . please note that when we look into a pool of water . we do not
the blue colour of the clear sky in white light . the blue colour has smallest wavelength and in the atmosphere the molecules of air and other fine particles have sizes smaller than the wavelength of visible light . therefore blue light is scattered more than any other colour . that is why sky appears blue . if earth had no atmosphere there would not have been any scattering and the sky would have looked dark . that is why it appears dark to the passengers flying at very high altitudes . as scattering is not prominent at such heights .
read a book with the spectacles . this person must keep the book at a distance greater than cm so that the image of the book by the concave lens is produced not closer than cm . the angular size of the book or its image at the greater distance is evidently less than the angular size when the book is placed at cm and spectacles are not needed . hence . the person prefers to remove the spectacles while reading .
 . hypermetropia long sightedness or far sightedness a long sighted person means that the long sight of the person to see distant objects is normal but his short sight to see nearby objects is defective . hypermetropia or long sightedness is that defect of vision due to which a person cannot see the nearby objects clearly though he can see the distant objects clearly . for example . a person having the defect hypermetropia cannot read a book clearly and comfortably though he can read the number of a distant bus clearly . the near point of a hypermetropic eye is more than centimetres away . such a person has to hold the reading material like a book or newspaper at an arm s length . much beyond cm from the eye for comfortable reading . please note that hypermetropia is just the opposite of myopia .
disadvantages a a lot of radioactive and toxic wastes are produced in the different stages of energy production from nuclear fission . they cannot be simply thrown away . so . they are stored in long term underground storage facilities . which are expensive to build . b in case of accidents . nuclear radiation may affect those near the site . radioactive materials that may leak out can contaminate vast areas of land . crops . water bodies . etc . c nuclear power plants cannot be located near populated areas . d nuclear power plants are expensive to build . e nuclear power plants also pose security problems . as the fuel and by products can be used to build nuclear weapons .
the system of two half rings and the associated brushes are referred to as a split ring commutator . the function of the commutator is to reverse the direction of current flowing through the coil after every half turn of the coil .
medium v medium fig . refraction of light as it moves from medium into medium . frequency of light does not change during refraction .
do you know india has about share in the world reserves of coal estimated to be billion tons . it is believed that the available coal reserves may last years more at the present rate of consumption .
bottom of a pool of water appears raised due to refraction of light . and the pool of water appears to be less deep than it actually is . we should be careful while entering a swimming pool because the water in it will be deeper than it appears to be .
cornea the transparent front projected part of eye ball is called cornea . it is a thin . transparent and white bulging portion of sclerotic in the front . it refracts most of the light rays into the eye .
construction a armature coil it consists of a single loop of a insulated copper wire in the form of a rectangle . rectangle abcd shown in figure is an armature coil .
magnetic flux is the product of magnetic field and the area of the coil . if the plane of the coil is perpendicular to the magnetic field .
illustrations the far point of a myopic person is cm . what is the focal length of the lens required to enable him to see very distant objects clearly ans . far point of normal human eye is infinity . i . e . . u and v cm use lens formula v u f . f f cm negative focal length means concave lens . 
thus . the electric iron will draw a current of . amperes from volt supply line .
this spectrum produced by the raindrops in the atmosphere is seen from the earth . the red colour of spectrum appears at the top of the rainbow whereas violet colour appears at its bottom . the formation of seven coloured rainbow in the sky shows that white sunlight consists of a mixture of seven coloured lights . we can also see a rainbow on a sunny day if we look through a spray of water from a fountain or through a waterfall with the sun behind us . before we go further and discuss atmospheric
 vi large concave mirrors are used in the field of solar energy to focus sun s rays for heating solar furnaces . this can be explained as follows the solar furnace is placed at the focus of a large concave reflector . the concave reflector focuses the sun s heat rays on the furnace due to which the solar furnace gets very hot . even steel can be melted in this solar furnace .
multiple refractions of light ray passing through a composite slab incident and emergent rays will be parallel . air ray d . air je emergent ray incident ray refrated i . e . . angle of a un incidence i will be equal to angle refracted of emergence e if interface ab is parallel to cd incident ray and emergent ray should be in same medium
generating electricity from tides a tidal power plant can be located at the mouth of a narrow bay . where tides cause regular and appreciable rise in the level of water . a dam with gates is constructed at the mouth of the bay figure . . at high tide . the level of the water in the bay rises . and it is allowed to flow in and collect behind the dam . when the tide ebbs . the water level in the sea starts falling . the dam gates are then closed . as a result . the level of water behind the dam remains higher than that in the bay . when the difference in the levels is sufficient . the gates of the dam are opened . and water is allowed to fall into the bay . this falling water is used to drive turbines connected to electric
if we hold a matchstick as object within the focus of a concave mirror . then a magnified . virtual and erect image of the matchstick is seen on looking into the concave mirror as shown in figure a . this
let us perform an experiment to verify this fact . take a straight copper rod . suspend it horizontally by means of two connecting wires between the poles of a strong horseshoe magnet as shown in figure . a and b . if a current is now passed in the rod as shown in figure . a . you will observe that the rod gets displaced . this displacement is caused by the force acting on the current carrying rod . in accordance with fleming s left hand rule . the magnet exerts a force on the rod directed upwards . with the result that the rod will get deflected upwards . now . reverse the direction of current or interchange the poles of the magnet as shown in figure . b . you will observe that the rod is now displaced downwards i . e . . deflection of the rod has reversed . this indicates that the direction of the force acting on the rod has reversed .
equivalent resistance in parallel connection figure . a shows three resistors of resistances r . r and r connected in parallel across the points a and b . the cell connected across these two points maintains a potential difference v across each resistor . the current through the cell is i . it gets divided at a into three parts iſ . in and iz . which flow through r . r and r respectively . reg fig . . let us replace the combination of resistors by an equivalent resistor reg such that the current i in the circuit does not change figure . a . the equivalent resistance is given by ohm s law as req v i . thus . rea the currents iż . iż and iz through the resistors r . r and r respectively are given by ohm s law as since the resistors are in parallel . i iz iz iz .
table . symbols of electrical elements used in electrical circuits . m lamp or load connecting wire wires crossing wires connected together e a cell battery ac source fixed resistance rheostat g hey switch off voltmeter ammeter galvanometer ground earth o key open switch closed key closed variable resistance . lamp or load it is an arrangement across which the output is obtained .
these fuels . however . do not produce much heat on burning and a lot of smoke is given out when they are burnt . therefore . technological inputs to improve the efficiency of these fuels are necessary . when wood is burnt in a
please note that if a ray of light is incident on a convex mirror along its principal axis . then it is reflected back along the same path because it will be normal or perpendicular to the mirror surface . the angle of incidence as well as the angle of reflection for such a ray of light will be zero .
refractive index why does light bend when it enters a different medium does light bend by the same amount while entering different media the answers to these lie in the fact that light travels at different speeds in different materials . therefore . when it travels from one medium to another . it either speeds up or slows down . the amount by which its speed changes determines the amount by which it changes its direction .
of incidence is greater than the critical angle . the whole of the light gets reflected . hence . it is called total internal reflection . for i ic . r . from snell s law . sin i n of sinic sinic n sinr ne sin na or sin ic n l . . . . n the critical angle is different for different pairs of media . the higher the refractive index ny of the denser medium . the smaller is the critical angle for the pair .
 . magnetic field due to a straight current carrying conductor take a copper wire ab . pass it through a cardboard as shown in figure . a .
category conductors resistivities of some common substances at c substance resistivity material metals . silver . x m . copper . x m . aluminium . x m . tungsten . x m . nickel . x m . iron . x m . chromium . x m . mercury . x m . manganese . x m alloys . manganin x m cu mn ni . constantan x q m cu ni . nichrome x m ni cr mn fe . germanium . l m . silicon m . glass to m . paper dry q m . diamond to m . hard rubber to q m . ebonite to m semiconductors insulators 
 . . . fixed dome type biogas plant a fixed dome biogas plant consists of an inlet chamber or mixing chamber where slurry paste of animal dung and other waste materials is prepared by adding equal amount of water . the slurry is then passed on to the underground digester tank . the digester tank is a closed underground tank made by laying bricks . since anaerobic microorganisms do not require oxygen . therefore . the digesters are designed as sealed chambers . organic waste material undergoes decomposition by microorganisms and biogas is produced which is collected in gas holder from where it is supplied to consumers . the residue left in digester tank is removed through the outlet chamber and is now called spent slurry
unaccommodated . accommodated lens lens ciliary ciliary muscle muscle contracted relaxed zonular zonular fibres fibres relaxed tension relaxed accommodated fig . . a power of accommodation of eye
 or an extension of this analysis to four or more resistors in parallel gives the following general expression . . . . . . rp r r r r for example . if we connect resistors of resistances . and ohm in parallel . then the equivalent resistance of the combination is obtained as r r . ohm . it is worth noting that in parallel combination of resistors . total current through the combination is the sum of the individual currents through the various branches . . the potential difference across all resistors is same . . the current through each branch is inversely proportional to the resistance of that branch . in other words . higher the resistance of a branch . lower is the current through it . . the reciprocal of the equivalent resistance equals the sum of the reciprocals of the individual resistances . the equivalent resistance is smaller than the smallest resistance in the parallel combination . . if two resistors r . and r . are in parallel . then the current i . and i . in ri them will be distributed as . where i is r₂ r r₂ r the total current in the circuit . ari and 
a simple electric circuit consisting of a battery two cells . a bulb . a key . an ammeter . a rheostat and a voltmeter as shown in figure . . all these circuit elements are connected in series with one another .
nuclear fission is an uncontrolled reaction in atom bomb whereas in nuclear reactors . it is controlled by using control rods of boron . steel or cadmium which capture some of the neutrons so that chain reaction does not become violent . slowing down the speed of neutrons by moderators e . g . . d . graphite so that neutrons can be captured more readily by the fuel . a circulating coolant water . molten na is employed to remove the heat from the reactor to outside where it is used for power production . the coolant liquid can also serve as the neutron moderator . u does not show fission by slow speed neutrons and that is why refining of uranium is necessary before its use as nuclear fuel in nuclear reactors . natural uranium consists of . u . u . elements upto ta have been found to undergo fission . pu was used in the first atom bomb explosion at hiroshima in japan .
senesse be boss miraglosbestodas sroesed debord cos gossas ber e stalo kor sih no es fig . cooking with biogas . biogas is a non pollution high calorific value fuel and does not have any storage problems .
activity put a coin in an opaque vessel placed on a table . looking at the coin . move back your head till the coin just disappears from view . then ask someone to pour water into the vessel gently . without displacing the coin . as the vessel fills with water . the coin will rise into view . figure . explains why this happens . initially . the rays starting from the coin do not fall on the eye figure . a . however . when the coin is below water . the rays bend at the surface of the water and fall on the eye figure . b . fig . . 
in the activity described above . white light is dispersed into its coloured components . we can recombine these components to produce white light . for this . take two similar prisms and keep the second one inverted with respect to the first figure . . let a narrow beam of white light fall on the combination of the prisms . and let the emergent light fall on a wall . you will get a white patch on the wall .
the solar cells cannot work at night when sunlight is not available . so . the electricity produced by a solar cell panel during the day time can be stored by charging a battery like a car battery and then used at night to power lights .
 . renewable and non renewable sources of energy all the sources of energy can be divided into two categories i renewable sources of energy . ii non renewable sources of energy . i renewable sources of energy or non conventional sources of energy 
the current flowing through the whole circuit be i . so . applying ohm s law to the whole circuit . we get v r or v i x r . . . . since the same current i flows through both the resistances r and r connected in series . so by applying ohm s law to both the resistances separately . we will get v i x r and v i x r . . . now . putting the values of v . v and v from equations . and in equation . we get . . . 
nuclear fusion you have seen that when a heavy nucleus breaks into two middleweight nuclei . a lot of energy is liberated . energy is also liberated when two light nuclei combine to form a single nucleus . this process is called nuclear fusion . the process of two or more light nuclei combining to form a heavier nucleus is called nuclear fusion . an example of nuclear fusion is given below . h h he n energy dueteron helium neutron deuteron is the nucleus of deuterium . an isotope of hydrogen . two deuterons combine to form the nucleus of helium . an isotope of helium . in this reaction . the mass of the product nucleus is less than the combined mass of the starting nuclei . the difference of mass is converted to energy . given by e mc² . the energy of the sun comes from nuclear fusion in which . in a series of reactions . hydrogen gets converted into helium . this is accompanied by the release of a huge amount of energy . we have plenty of hydrogen on the earth . is it possible to use it to get energy from fusion scientists are working hard to produce usable energy from fusion reactions . however . the high temperature about k required for fusion causes problems . all materials vapourize at that temperature . so . you cannot even have a solid container to hold the particles for fusion fusion has been used to make nuclear bombs that are more powerful than those based on fission . these are called hydrogen bombs or thermonuclear bombs . to start fusion . a small fission bomb is used as the first stage of the thermonuclear bomb . its blast creates the high temperature and pressure required for fusion .
and erect but decreases in size and it moves away from the mirror towards the focus of the mirror . thi
parallel beam it is a beam in which all the rays constituting the beam move parallel to each other and diameter of beam remains same .
a solar cooker uses renewable energy for cooking . therefore . cooking is cheaper and non polluting .
you might have observed that the bottom of a tank or a pond containing water appears to be raised . similarly . when a thick glass slab is placed over some printed matter . the letters appear raised when viewed through the glass slab . why does it happen have you seen a pencil partly immersed in water in
reflected ray the ray of light reflected from the reflecting surface . is called the reflected ray . oq is the reflected ray .
the region around a magnet in which its magnetic force can be experienced by another magnetic substance is called magnetic field of the magnet . a magnetic field line is a pictorial representation of a magnetic field around a magnet .
note that in this convention . f and r are negative for a concave mirror and positive for a convex mirror . also . heights above the principal axis are positive and those below it are negative . the sign convention is summarized in figure . .
the central principle of electromagnetic induction is faraday s law which is the keystone of this section . this law relates induced potential difference to the changing magnetic flux in any loop . including a closed circuit .
magnet a substance which attracts small pieces of iron and always points in north south direction when suspended freely or hanged freely is known as a magnet .
electric circuits a cell or battery can make electrons move and electric current flow . but there must be a conducting path like wires . bulb . etc . between the two terminals of the cell through which electrons can move causing the electric current to flow . a continuous conducting path consisting of wires and other resistances like electric bulb . etc . and a switch . between the two terminals of a cell or a battery along which an electric current flows . is called a circuit . a simple electric circuit is shown in figure a .
este booooooo preces sa scena re usato ge sora peror bah poster boss per par sssssssss ses sen or word abo s ole patente secretele de ne bega hon or baterie de doo ondazenagem note . a concave mirror forms a virtual image in only one situation i . e . . when the object lies between the pole and the focus .
green . blue or violet components of white light . as scattered intensity a j so yellow colour is least scattered and produces sufficient illumination .
generators . in some power plants . the water flowing in at high tide is also used to generate a part of the power . for a tidal power plant . the difference between the water levels at high tide and low tide should be about metres . not many places have this . for this reason . tidal energy cannot be a major source of electrical power .
heating effect of electric current when an electric current passes through a bulb . the filament gets so hot that it glows and emits light . when a current passes through the filament of an electric iron . the iron becomes very hot . this increase in temperature is due to what is called the heat produced due to current . suppose a resistor r is connected to a cell figure . . the fig . . cell maintains a potential difference v across the resistor . driving a current i through it . so . v ir . the current through the resistor is actually a flow of negative charges electrons . inside the cell . the negative charges flow from the positive to the negative terminal . the cell does work qv . to take a charge through the potential difference v between its terminals . this increases the energy of the charge by qv . this increased energy gets converted to heat in the resistor . so . the energy appearing as heat is given by u qv . the charge that passes through the wire in time t is q it . iii using i . ii and iii . we find that the heat produced in the wire in timet is u qv it ir i²rt . ii heat produced by current u i rt . . . . from equation . we see that the heat produced is proportional to the square of the current . if r and t remain constant . so . if the current passing for a given time through a given resistance is doubled . the heat produced becomes four times . similarly . for a giveni and t . the heat produced is proportional to r . if the same current i passes through two resistances in a given time . more heat w ill be produced in the larger resistance . the heat produced can also be written as of u i rt r . . . oi r
concave lenses . meniscus . . planoconcave . . double concave or bi concave . figure . shows the different types of diverging lenses . the double of bi concave lens has both surfaces concave . the planoconcave has one plane surface and the other a concave surface while the concave meniscus or the convexo concave has one concave and one convex surface . if the above lenses are surrounded by a material with a refractive index greater than that of the lens . the convex lens gets converted into a concave lens and vice versa .
the si unit for resistance is volt per ampere . which is called an ohm and is represented by the greek capital letter omega . one ohm is defined as the resistance of a conductor if a current of ampere flows through it under a potential difference of volt . ohm s law is not a fundamental law of nature like newton s laws of motion . it is only a statement of the way certain materials behave in electric circuits . also . from eq . . . we have i v r . . . . it is obvious from eq . . that the current through a resistor is inversely proportional to its resistance . if the resistance is doubled . the current gets halved . in many practical cases it is necessary to increase or decrease the current in an electric circuit . a component used to regulate current without changing the voltage source is called variable resistance . in an electric circuit . a device called rheostat is often used to change the resistance in the circuit .
surface or bulging out surface . a convex mirror is shown in figure b . in which the convex reflecting surface has been marked b . the other surface a in figure b . having short . oblique lines is the non reflecting surface . the back side of a shining steel spoon is an example of convex mirror see figure . in our ray diagrams . we use only the side view of a convex mirror as shown in figure b . if . however . we look at a convex mirror from the front . it appears like a piece of thin . round glass whose front shining surface is bulging outward but the back surface covered with paint is bent inward . a spherical mirror concave mirror or convex mirror works on the reflection of light . we will now understand the meaning of some new terms such as centre of curvature . radius of curvature . pole . and principal axis . which are used in the study of spherical mirrors .
yellow colour headlights in foggy weather in a foggy weather scattering of light is large because of more particles scatters are present in air . yellow colour light is used in the headlights of the vehicles because wavelength of yellow colour of the light is large and it does not undergo large scattering . it is observable from a large distance and is easy to produce .
produced forward and emergent ray lm is produced backward . then the two rays meet at o . the angle ztol d is known as angle of deviation . so . the angle of deviation means the angle between emergent and incident rays . i . e . . the angle through which the incident ray has turned in passing through the prism . from triangle qol . i r i r i r r from quadrilateral dqnl . a º or a . . . ii from triangle qnl . r r . . . iii from eqs . ii and iii . r r a . r r a substituting the value in eq . i we get d i iz a or iz a . . . i 
image formed by a spherical mirror a concave mirror can form a real as well as a virtual image . if the image is real . it is inverted . if the image is virtual . it is erect . the size of the image can be smaller than . equal to or larger than the size of the object . a convex mirror always forms a virtual . erect and smaller image .
two refracted rays ax and by . when produced backwards . meet at point i under water . in fact . when the rays ax and by enter the eye e . they appear to be coming from point i . so . point i is the virtual image of point o which is at the bottom of the pool . it is clear from figure that the image i is nearer to the surface of water than the point o . thus . a point o at the bottom of a pool appears to be much nearer at position .
disadvantages of tree system of wiring a since all circuits originate from the main distribution board . longer length of the wire is required for wiring various rooms and other places in the house . b when a fuse in one particular line blows off . all the appliances in that line are disconnected . c plugs and sockets of different current capacities are required for different appliances depending upon the wattage . d on account of large length of wire . it is an expensive wiring system . e it takes a long time to be installed . all these disadvantage are removed in the ring system .
please note that the laws of reflection of light apply to all kinds of mirrors . plane mirrors as well as spherical mirrors like concave mirrors and convex mirrors . by using the laws of reflection of light . we can find out the nature and position of the images of objects formed by the various types of mirrors .
the optical centre and focus in front of the concave lens . from the above discussion we conclude that when an object is placed anywhere between optical centre c and infinity in front of a concave lens . the image formed is i between optical centre c and focus f . ii virtual and erect . and iii diminished smaller than the object .
other problems of the eye apart from the common defects described above . a person may develop other problems that hinder clear vision . for example . looking at the sun with naked eyes during a solar eclipse can damage the retina . a common problem in old age is cataract . which gradually reduces the amount of light reaching the retina . the crystalline lens of the eye is made of proteins that are arranged in a regular pattern . which makes the lens transparent . when a group of these protein molecules get lumped in a region . it becomes opaque . and we say that a cataract has developed in the region . gradually the cataract grows . and finally . the whole lens becomes opaque . and as the cataract grows . the ability of the person to see diminishes . to restore vision . the affected lens is surgically removed . and an artificial lens is placed in its place .
 an electric iron draws a current of . a when voltage is v . calculate the amount of charge flowing through it in one hour . ans . here . i . a . t hour s q i x t . c note that the voltage . i . e . . v does not enter into calculation of charge flowing through the electric iron as it only maintains a current of . a through the electric iron .
few definitions centre of curvature the centre of the hollow sphere of which mirror forms a part is called the centre of curvature of the mirror . it is represented by point c .
suppose we have a convex lens of focal length cm . then its focus f will be at a distance of cm on its left side . and its f will be at a distance of cm on the left side . so . by saying that the object is beyond f of this convex lens . we will mean that the object is beyond cm from convex lens on the left side . and by saying that the image is formed between f and f on the other side . we will mean that the image is formed at a distance between cm and cm from the convex lens on the right hand side of the lens . figure shows an actual picture of the formation of a real . inverted and diminished image by a convex lens of the filament of a lighted bulb on a screen . case . when the object is at infinity
 ii concave mirrors are used by dentists to see the large images of the teeth of patients . this is because when a tooth is within the focus of a concave mirror . then an enlarged image of the tooth is seen in the concave mirror . due to this . it becomes easier to locate the defect in the tooth . the concave mirrors used by dentists are very small in size . they are fitted in a frame with a long handle .
 . . . advantages of using animal dung for making biogas dio the following are the advantages of using animal dung for making biogas . animal dung used in biogas plant prevents both air and water pollution . . along with animal dung . human excreta . vegetable wastes and paper scrap can also be added in the biogas plant . this prevents environmental pollution . . the raw material required for the production of biogas is inexpensive and easily available . thus fuel produced by this method is very cheap . . the residue left in a biogas plant is excellent manure rich in nitrates and phosphates .
sign convention for spherical lenses these days new cartesian sign convention is used for measuring the various distances in the ray diagrams of spherical lenses convex lenses and concave lenses . according to the new cartesian sign convention i all the distances are measured from the optical centre of the lens . ii the distances measured in the same direction as that of incident light are taken as positive . iii the distances measured against the direction of incident light are taken as negative . iv the distances measured upward and perpendicular to the principal axis are taken as positive . v the distances measured downward and perpendicular to the principal axis are taken as negative .
we know that the danger signal lights are red in colour . this is because the red coloured light having longer wavelength is the least scattered by fog or smoke particles . due to this the red light can be seen in the same colour even from a distance .
by minute colloidal sulphur particles . observe the colour of the transmitted light from the fourth side of the glass tank facing the circular hole . it is interesting to observe at first the orange red colour and then bright crimson red colour on the screen .
sample problem . how much energy is given to each coulomb of charge passing through a v battery ncert book question solution . the term each coulomb means every coulomb . so the charge here is coulomb . the potential difference is volts . we have to find out the energy . this energy will be equal to the work done now . work done potential difference charge moved v or so . work done . w x joules j since the work done on each coulomb of charge is joules . therefore . the energy given to each coulomb of charge is also joules . before we go further and discuss electric current . please answer the following questions 
on cooling . steam condenses to form water . this water is again sent to the boiler to form fresh steam . this process is repeated again and again .
now . the two reflected rays df and ec are diverging rays and . therefore . do not intersect each other on the left
when the object is at f . virtual . erect . diminished and on the same side as the object . f f b 
 ii inversely proportional to the radius of circular loop or circular wire . in this discussion we have considered the magnetic field produced by a circular loop or circular wire which consists of only one turn of the wire . the strength of magnetic field can be increased by taking a circular coil consisting of a number of turns of insulated copper wire closely wound together . thus . if there is a circular coil having n turns . the magnetic field produced by this current carrying circular coil will be n times as large as that produced by a circular loop of a single turn of wire . this is because the current in each circular turn of coil flows in the same direction and magnetic field produced by each turn of circular coil then just adds up . we can now say that the strength of magnetic field produced by a circular coil carrying current is directly proportional to both . number of turns n and current i but inversely proportional to its radius r . thus . the strength of magnetic field produced by a current carrying circular coil can be increased i by increasing the number of turns of wire in the coil . ii by increasing the current flowing through the coil . and iii by decreasing the radius of the coil .
electromagnetic induction electricity from magnetism we have already studied that an electric current can produce magnetism . the reverse of this is also true . that is . magnetism or magnets can produce electric current . the production of electricity from magnetism is called electromagnetic induction . for example . when a straight wire is moved up and down rapidly between the two poles of a horseshoe magnet . then an electric current is produced in the wire . this is an example of electromagnetic induction . again . if a bar magnet is moved in and out of a coil of wire . even then an electric current is produced in the coil . this is also an example of electromagnetic induction .
atmospheric refraction when sunlight enters the earth s atmosphere . then it continuously goes from rarer to the denser medium therefore . refraction of light takes place . the refraction of light taking place in the atmosphere is known as atmospheric refraction .
the rule can be remembered with help of the following tip shown in figure .
concave or convex . if both the surfaces of a lens are convex . it is called a double convex or biconvex lens . it is a type of convex lens . and the type of concave lens in which both the surfaces are concave is called a double concave or biconcave lens . b d convex concave convex concave fig . . lenses of all kinds can be made very thin . such lenses are called thin lenses . figure . shows two thin lenses which have been divided into small sections . notice that the middle section of each lens is almost rectangular . so . a ray of light incident on this section is displaced parallel to itself . and the displacement is proportional to the thickness of the section . for a thin lens . the displacement of a ray incident near its middle is negligible . and the ray passes through the lens almost without deviation . in our discussions we will assume that all the lenses are thin . also . we will assume that the aperture the surface of the lens is small . note that in the diagrams the width of the lens has been kept to give you a clear picture . and it fig . . does not indicate the actual thickness of the lens .
dx by a solid line . now . dx is the first refracted ray which appears to be coming from focus f of the concave lens .
the refractive index of a medium is more for violet light and less for red light . because in a medium red light travels faster than violet light . when the colour of light is not mentioned . the refractive index is written for yellow light . for example . if the refractive index for glass is . . it means this refractive index of glass is for yellow light .
a ray of light passing through the focus after refraction becomes parallel to the principal axis .
a major drawback of solar panels is the availability of efficient systems to store the energy generated by the cells and make it available when required . although batteries are used to store the energy . but these batteries are unable to operate devices working on alternating current as these batteries store energy in the form of direct current .
in both cases . faraway objects cannot be seen clearly . although nearby objects can . though parallel rays focus short of the retina . a divergent beam coming from a point o gets focused on the retina . when the focal length of the eye lens is maximum figure . b . then . for this person . o is the far point . clearly . the far point of a myopic person is much closer than infinity .
but there are certain phenomena in which . light behaves as a particle . the most striking of these phenomena is the photoelectric effect an effect in which electrons are ejected out of a metal surface when light of suitable frequency is incident on it . also discovered by hertz . this was in contradiction of the wave theory .
space vacated by hot air . it is this moving air which is called wind .
the resistance which can be changed as desired is called variable resistance . variable resistance has two symbols shown in figure g . variable resistance is also known as rheostat . rheostat is a variable resistance which is usually operated by a sliding contact on a long coil made of resistance wire . a rheostat is used to change the current in a circuit without changing the voltage source like the cell or battery . it can do so by changing the resistance of the circuit . the galvanometer is a current detecting instrument which we will come across in the next chapter . the switch or plug key is a device for making or breaking an electric circuit . when the switch is open . then the circuit breaks and no current flows in it see figure k . but when the switch is closed . then the circuit is made or completed and current flows in it see figure .
 . . faraday s experiment and laws during the s . several pioneering experiments with magnetically induced potential difference were carried out in england by michael faraday and in the united states by joseph henry .
 . thin lenses have you ever touched the glass used in spectacles or the one used by watchmakers to see tiny parts . is the surface of this glass plane or curved is it thicker in the middle or at the edges you will find that the surface of this glass is not plane it is curved . these glasses are examples of lenses . now . let us find out what a lens is and what use we make of it . the most familiar and widely used optical device is the lens .
the fuel which we choose should be cheap and easily available . another point which we have to keep in mind is that the fuel should be easy to handle . safe to transport and convenient to store . the fuel should have low percentage of non combustible materials . this means that the residue left behind after the burning of a fuel should be as low as possible . for example . coal is a fuel which leaves behind a lot of ash after burning . the removal and disposal of ash poses a big problem in factories and power plants where large quantities of coal are burnt everyday . the fuel should burn smoothly and at a steady rate . this is teady rate . this is because if a fuel burns too fast . then most of the heat produced by it will be
in this case . light from a distant object is focused in front of the retina fig . . the distinguishing feature of this condition is that distant objects are not seen clearly .
the non renewable sources of energy are also called conventional sources of energy . the non renewable sources of energy like fossil fuels coal . petroleum and natural gas are present in a limited amount in the earth . once exhausted . they will not be available to us again . the nuclear fuels like uranium have been put in the category of non renewable sources of energy because the nuclear materials which can be conveniently extracted from the earth are limited and hence they will get exhausted one day . please note that since the non renewable sources of energy can get exhausted one day . they are also known as exhaustible sources of energy . another point to be noted is that though nuclear fuels are non renewable source of energy dug out from the earth . they are not conventional source of energy .
controlling pollution caused by fossil fuels the pollution caused by burning fossil fuels can be controlled or reduced to some extent by increasing the efficiency of the combustion process . and by using various techniques to reduce the escape of harmful gases and ash into the surrounding air . this will become clear from the following discussion .
 i dust particles and water droplets suspended in the atmosphere are much larger than the wavelength range of visible light . when white light coming from the sun hits these larger particles . it gets reflected or
 . heating effect of current . . joule s heating when the ends of a conductor are connected to a battery . then free electrons move with drift velocity and electric current flows through the wire . these electrons collide continuously with the positive ions of the wire and thus the energy taken from the battery is dissipated . to maintain the electric current in the wire . energy is taken continuously from the battery . this energy is transformed to the ions of the wire by the electrons . this increases the thermal motion of the ions as a result the temperature of the wire rises . the effect of electric current due to which heat is produced in a wire when current is passed through it is called heating effect of current or joule heating . in joule found that when current is passed through a conductor the
 a the image of matchstick in the convex mirror is virtual . erect and diminished smaller in size .
electricity can be classified into two parts . static electricity . and . current electricity . in static electricity . the electric charges remain at rest or stationary . they do not move . the charge acquired by a glass rod rubbed with a silk cloth and the charge acquired by an ebonite rod rubbed with a woollen cloth are the examples of static electricity . the lightning which we see in the sky during the rainy season also involves static electricity . in current electricity . the electric charges are in motion and produce an electric current . the electricity which we use in our homes is the current electricity see figure . in this chapter . we will discuss only current electricity in detail . so . when we talk of electricity in these discussions . it will actually mean current electricity .
r resistors in parallel when two or more resistors are combined in such a way that their first ends are connected to one point and the second ends to another point then this combination is in parallel . in this combination the potential difference between the ends of all the resistors is same but the current in different resistances are different . in figure three resistors r . r and r are joined in parallel between the points a and b . suppose the current flowing from the cell is i . at the point a . this current is divided into three parts . suppose . and are the currents in r . r and r respectively . at the point b . these three currents meet and form the main current i . thus . we have i . . . i let the potential difference between the points a and b be v . since each resistance is connected between a and b . the potential difference between the ends of each will be v . therefore 
colour blindness can develop as a result of eye infection or eye damage . usually colour blindness is an inherited trait genetic disorder affecting the cones .
the case of light going from air into glass and again into air we have just studied the refraction of light from air into glass figure . and from glass into air figure . we will now show these two types of refraction in the same diagram . in other words . we will now show the complete path of a ray of light when it passes from air into glass slab and again into air . this is shown in figure .
gas is found in the same rocks as coal and oil . it . too . was formed from the half decayed remains of plants . animals and bacteria . gas is often only found in small amounts . because it can easily leak away through tiny spaces in rocks .
 vi images an image is a point or plane to which rays are converged or from which they appear to diverge after reflection or refraction of light . when we comb our hair while standing in front of a plane mirror . we see our image in the mirror . we ourselves are object and what we see in the mirror is our image . when we watch a movie in a cinema house we are actually watching images of the actors on the screen . images are formed at the point where rays of light actually intersect or at the point from where they appear to originate . images are classified as a real and b virtual .
in case of a concave mirror . the rays of light incident parallel to the principal axis . after reflection actually meet at point f . on the other hand . in case of a convex mirror . the rays of light incident parallel to principal axis . after reflection from the mirror do not meet at f but appear to come from it . when produced backward . rays come together at focal point in front light rays of mirror normal normal light p rays m rays come together at focal point behind m mirror reflected rays convex mirror reflected rays concave mirror
the eye lens is a convex lens made of a transparent . soft and flexible material like å jelly made of proteins . being flexible . the eye lens can change its shape it can become thin or thick to focus light on to the retina . the eye lens is held in position by suspensory ligaments . one end of suspensory ligaments is
 in dispersion of white light . violet light bends the most and red light bends the least . the phenomenon in which a part of the light incident on a particle is redirected in different directions is called scattering of light . very small particles scatter lights of shorter wavelengths bluish lights better than longer wavelengths . the scattering of longer wavelengths of light reddish lights increases as the size of the particles increases . large particles scatter lights of all wavelengths equally well .
harnessing the ocean thermal energy there is a temperature difference between the water at the surface of the sea and deep below the sea . the difference in temperature at many places is of the order of c . this difference in temperature can be exploited to produce electric energy in ocean thermal energy conversion plant otec .
formation of image by a convex mirror
 name some places in india where fields of natural gas are found . why is it called a clean fuel ans . in india . natural gas is found in offshore areas of mumbai . krishna godavari basin . jaisalmer . etc . it is called a clean fuel because a it does not leave residue . b it does not produce smoke . c it does not produce harmful gases .
s . position of object no . . at infinity fig . . between infinity and the pole fig . 
as a reflector in street lamps the light incident on the lamp is reflected by the convex mirror and reflected light spreads in the form of a divergent beam . therefore . light spreads over a larger area .
the deviation produced by a prism when white light is incident on it increases with the increasing refractive index and frequency and decreasing wavelength . violet light is deviated most . and red is deviated least other colours are in intermediate positions . when it comes out of the prism . light is spread in a fan shaped beam as shown in figure . . this fan shaped beam or the band of the coloured components of light is termed as a spectrum . light is said to be dispersed into a spectrum consisting of violet . indigo . blue . green . yellow . orange and red . the acronym short form vibgyor is a handy mnemonic aid to memory for remembering the order of the colours produced by a prism or those in the rainbow . indigo is included mostly for the mnemonic people can seldom distinguish it from blue or violet .
the first part of the house wiring system consists of the supply of electrical energy by the electrical company to the premises of the consumer . the company supplies electric power through overhead or underground cables to the meter box . the power is supplied through a cable consisting of three wires i live or phase wire . ii neutral wire and iii the earth wire .
coal coal is a complex mixture of compounds of carbon . hydrogen and oxygen . and some free carbon . small amounts of nitrogen and sulphur compounds are also present in coal see figure . it is found in
in order to provide a strong magnetic field in a small region . an electromagnet is made in the u shape as shown in figure b . such a magnet is called a horse shoe magnet . uses of electromagnets i they are used to lift heavy iron pieces . they are fitted on cranes lifting heavy objects of scrap iron . ii they are used in many devices like electric bell . electric horn . telephone receiver . electric relay . microphones . radio set . television . loudspeakers etc .
two or more electric elements are said to be connected in parallel if the same potential difference exists across them .
image formation of big objects the object is divided into many points . point to point images are obtain . by combining the point images . the image of the whole object is obtained . real point images give real image and virtual point images give virtual image of the complete object . note since lenses used are supposed to have a small aperture . their surfaces can be taken as plane and their principal sections can be represented by a straight line . example in figure . xy represent principal section of a convex lens . it is taken plane due to its small aperture . principal axis a f ab is a real object having bottom a on the principal axis and top b upwards . three special rays are shown coming from top b . incident on the lens and refracted as shown in figure . they actually meet at a point b . which becomes real image of b . a lies perpendicularly below b . on the principal axis . a must represent image of bottom a of the object . a b represents real image of complete object ab . for small distances and sizes involved . the ray diagram can be drawn on same scale . for bigger distances and sizes . the diagram has to be drawn on a chosen scale .
 . solar cells are used for the transmission of radio and television programmes in remote areas . . solar cells are used for providing electricity to light houses situated in the sea and to off shore oil drilling rig platforms . . solar cells are used for operating traffic signals . watches . calculators and toys .
the first steps towards correctly explaining the colour of the sky were taken by john tyndall in . he discovered that when light passes through a clear fluid holding small particles in suspension . the shorter blue wavelengths are scattered more strongly than the red . this can be demonstrated by shining a beam of white light through a tank of water with a little milk or soap mixed in fig . . from the side the beam can be seen by the blue light it scatters . but the light seen directly from the end is reddened after it has passed through the tank . the scattered light can also be shown to be polarised using a filter of polarised light . just as the sky appears a deeper blue through polarised sunglasses .
magnetic field due to a coil . it is held in a vertical plane and is made to pass through a smooth cardboard in such a way that the centre o of the coil lies at the cardboard . a current is passed through the coil and iron filings are sprinkled on the cardboard . these iron filings arrange themselves in a pattern similar to one shown in the figure a . an actual pattern is shown in figure b . this pattern represents the magnetic field lines due to the coil .
convex mirror a convex mirror is one at which reflection takes place from outer surface and whose inner surface is polished .
place a glass of tap water in front of a paper screen or wall . shine a laser pointer or a small powerful torch through the water . you will only see spots of light on the screen and on the walls of the glass activity screen path of light laser pointer water water muk a fig . . the path of light through the water is visible when milk is added to the water .
classification of sources of energy renewable sources of energy are those which can be generated by us or which are constantly being generated by natural processes or whose supply is unlimited . examples the sun . wind . flowing water . nonrenewable sources of energy are those which were produced in the past by natural processes . whose supply is limited and which we cannot generate ourselves . examples coal . petroleum . natural gas . sources of energy that have been in use for centuries are called conventional sources of energy . examples wood . coal . petroleum and flowing water . sources of energy that we have started using in new ways or only in recent times are called nonconventional or alternate sources of energy . examples solar . geothermal . tidal . wave and nuclear energy
note eges seca on abs cada conva do decesessere bestel els any lens that is thicker at its centre than at its edges is a converging lens with positive f . and any lens that is thicker at its edges than at the centre is a diverging lens with negative f . bhub foto is be engegara dan dorot . bece des shers be s ecare code rose sec gereeds es
on what does resistance depend resistance depends on the material we have seen that for a given wire . the current is proportional to the potential difference applied across it . what if we take a wire of a different material connect a circuit as shown in figure . . in which ab represents a wire . take wires of different materials . but of the same cross sectional area same thickness and the same length . you may take a nichrome wire . fuse wire . copper wire . an iron wire . and so on . connect each wire one by one between a and b . after connecting a particular wire . insert the key into the plug . then read the ammeter to note the current i passing through that wire . you will find that the value of the current is different for different wires . since the same cell is used every time . the
 iii when light is incident normally on an optically denser medium a ray of light passing normally . i . e . . at right angles from one optical medium to another optical medium . does not bend or deviate from its path . in this case . angle of incidence and angle of refraction both are equal to zero . optically rarer medium optically rarer medium optically denser medium optically denser medium passing from optically rarer medium to optically denser medium passing from optically denser medium to optically rarer medium
 . large areas of agricultural land . a vast variety of flora and fauna plants and animals as well as human settlements or villages get submerged in the water of reservoir formed by the dam . due to this many plants and trees are destroyed . animals get killed and many people are rendered homeless . this creates the problem of satisfactory rehabilitation of the people displaced from the dam site .
 . presbyopia in old age . due to ciliary muscles becoming weak and the eye lens becoming inflexible or rigid . the eye loses its power of accommodation . because of this an old person cannot see the nearby objects clearly . this leads to the defect called presbyopia . presbyopia is that defect of vision due to which an old person cannot see the nearby objects clearly due to loss of power of accommodation of the eye . for example . an old person having presbyopia cannot read a book or newspaper comfortably and clearly without spectacles . presbyopia occurs in old age due to the gradual weakening of the ciliary muscles and diminishing flexibility of the eye lens . the near point of the old person having presbyopia gradually recedes and becomes much more than centimetres away . actually . presbyopia is a special kind of hypermetropia . we can call it old age hypermetropia . presbyopia is the hypermetropia or long sightedness caused by the loss of power of accommodation of the eye due to old age . presbyopia defect is corrected in the same way as hypermetropia by using spectacles having convex lenses see figure .
permanent magnets are usually made of alloys such as carbon steel . chromium steel . cobalt steel . tungsten steel . and alnico alnico is an alloy of aluminium . nickel . cobalt and iron . permanent magnets of these alloys are much more strong than those made of ordinary steel . such strong permanent magnets are used in microphones . loudspeakers . electric clocks . ammeters . voltmeters . speedometers . and many other devices . let us solve one problem now . sample problem . the magnetic field in a given region is uniform . draw a diagram to represent it . ncert book question 
multiply and divide r . h . s . of eqn . i by c speed of light in air . we get . . . ii c o v but ny absolute refractive index of medium and n absolute refractive index of medium v hence . eqn . ii can be written as n om n n . . . iii thus . relative refractive index of medium with respect to medium is defined as the ratio of absolute refractive index of medium to the absolute refractive index of medium . sini . . . iv sini n comparing eqns . iii and iv . we get or ny sin i n sin r . . . v sinr n we know . refractive index of medium with respect to medium is given by . n . . . vi va similarly . refractive index of medium with respect to is given by . în . . . vii also sinr multiplying eqn . vi and vii . we get . n xn x or n v v n i . e . . refractive index of medium with respect to medium is the reciprocal of refractive index of medium with respect to medium . for example . refractive index of water with respect to air . for water . wha or . . for glass . gna . when light goes from water to glass . refractive index of glass with respect to water . v . 
 calculate the energy transferred by a a current flowing through a resistor of ohms for minutes . ans . here . current . i a resistance . r time . t minutes hours energy . e from relation . e pt we have . e rt putting values . we get e xx watt hour kwh . kwh energy transferred . e . kwh note for energy in joules t minutes s . e rt j . j 
refraction of light the bending of light rays when they pass obliquely from one medium to another medium is called refraction of light . in other words when light rays are incident on a transparent surface medium . they are bent as they enter in second transparent medium . this phenomenon of bending of ray of light in second medium is called refraction of light . examples of refraction i a spoon dipped in water . the parts of the spoon in air and water appear disjointed . ii while standing in a clear pool of water . the bottom looks raised and our legs appear shorter .
a galvanometer is an instrument that can detect the presence of a current in a circuit . the pointer remains at zero the centre of the scale for zero current flowing through it . it can deflect either to the left or to the right of the zero mark depending on the direction of current the induced current in a coil depends upon a strength of the magnetic field . b number of turns in the coil . and c relative speed of the magnet and the coil .
hydro energy is a clean and a renewable energy .
generating electricity at nuclear power plants to generate electricity . nuclear fission is carried out in a setup called a nuclear reactor . the energy released is used to generate steam . which drives turbines connected to generators . the whole system . including the nuclear reactor . the turbine . etc . . is called a nuclear power plant .
radius of curvature the radius of the sphere . of which the mirror forms a part is called the radius of curvature of the mirror . it is represented by r . the distance pc r represents the radius of curvature of the mirror .
distances from a plane mirror but they are on the opposite sides of the plane mirror . for example . if an object is placed at a distance of cm in front of a plane mirror . then its image will also be formed at a distance of cm behind the mirror . and the total distance between the object and its image will be cm . that is . the object will be at a distance of cm from its image .
the bending of light when it travels from one medium into another is called refraction of light .
the extremely hot rocks present below the surface of earth heat the underground water and turn it into steam see figure . as more and more steam is formed between the rocks . it gets compressed to high pressures . a hole is drilled into the earth up to the hot rocks and a pipe is put into it . the steam present around the hot rocks comes up through the pipe at high pressure . this high pressure steam turns the turbine of a generator to produce electricity .
strength of the magnetic field due to the current in a straight wire a compass needle gets deflected when kept near a current carrying wire . if the current in the wire is increased by applying a greater potential difference across it . the needle gets deflected by a larger angle . this means that the strength of the magnetic field increases with increase in current . in fact . the strength of the magnetic field produced by an electric current is directly proportional to the current if you move a compass away from a current carrying wire . you will notice that as the distance of the compass from the wire increases . the deflection of its needle decreases . this means that the strength of the magnetic field reduces with distance from the wire . for a long . straight current carrying wire . the strength of the magnetic field is inversely proportional to the distance .
the food to be cooked is taken in a vessel and placed inside the cooker . the temperature inside the cooker reaches c in about hours in summer . so . you can cook food that requires slow heating like dal . vegetables . rice . and so on .
a solar cell is a small wafer of semiconductor device . which has a light sensitive semiconductor junction . when sunlight falls on the semiconductor junction a potential difference is created between the two regions of the semiconductor junction . thereby converting sunlight into electrical energy . these days solar cells are made of semiconductor materials like silicon and gallium . earlier sunlight was made to fall on layers of selenium element . which was then converted to electrical energy . however . the efficiency of selenium was only . per cent . the first practical solar cell was made in the year . this solar cell could convert only . per cent of sunlight to electrical energy . due to the use of semiconductor . like . silicon . gallium and germanium the efficiency of solar cells has increased to per cent . a modern selenium solar cell can convert per cent of solar energy into electricity . the multiple layer solar cells can convert both the visible and the infrared radiation into electricity .
mark an arrowhead to show the direction of magnetic line of force . which will be north pole to south pole outside the magnet . this dotted curve marked with an arrowhead represents a magnetic field line . similarly . starting from other points near the north pole of the magnet . draw other magnetic lines of force . magnetic field lines plotted for a bar magnet are as shown in figure . .
if the object to be seen is close to the eye i . e . . near to the eye . then the sharp image of this object can be formed on the retina of the eye by decreasing the focal length of the eye lens . the focal length of a lens decreases if its thickness increases . thus . to increase the thickness of the eye lens and hence to decrease its focal length . ciliary muscles contract .
angle of incidence the angle that the incident ray makes with the normal . is called the angle of incidence . it is represented by the symbol i . angle pon is the angle of incidence .
power of accommodation the ability of an eye to focus the distant objects as well as the nearby objects on the retina by changing the focal length of its lens
activity wind a solenoid directly over an iron bolt or nail . using feet of thick enamelled copper wire . in these wires . the enamel coating acts as the insulator . use adhesive tape to keep the turns in place . scrape off the enamel from the free ends of the wire . and connect them to a battery through a switch . now . close the switch . the bolt will attract iron and steel objects placed near it . if you turn the current off . the bolt will no longer attract these objects .
figure shows a ray of light ao going from air a rarer medium into glass which is a denser medium . in this case . the incident ray ao gets refracted at point o and bends towards the normal on and goes in the direction ob inside the glass slab . thus . when a ray of light goes from air into glass . it bends towards the normal at the point of incidence . in this case . the angle of refraction r is smaller than the angle of incidence i .
experimentally . it has been found that the force experienced by the current carrying conductor . in a magnetic field . i is directly proportional to the magnitude of current flowing through the conductor i . e . . f i . ii is directly proportional to the magnitude of the magnetic field of the magnet i . e . . f o b . iii is directly proportional to the length of the conductor inside the magnetic field i . e . . f . l . iv is directly proportional to the sine of the angle between the conductor and the magnetic field i . e . . foc sin . combining the above . we have f bil sin this force is maximum if i . e . . the rod is perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic field . then f bil if or . f 
the above two cases have been summarised in the table below for quick reference . table . for a convex mirror
competition window the magnitude of magnetic field at the centre of current carrying circular loop and coil is for circular loop n . в ко b r for circular coil n b moni . where n number of turns in loop or coil and r radius of circular loop or coil
 . . . wind energy in india india s potential for useful wind energy plant is about . mw . this may constitute about per cent of the national installed capacity by ad . it is estimated that nearly . mw of electrical power can be generated if india s wind potential is fully exploited . wind farms ranging from kw to kw have been installed in gujarat . tamil nadu . rajasthan . coastal belts and bay of bengal . another wind energy power station of mw capacity has been established at okha in gujarat and another at lamba in porbandar in gujarat . the largest wind farm has been established near kanya kumari in tamil nadu . it can generate mw of electricity . at present the installed capacity of wind energy in india is more than mw .
the magnetic field due to a current carrying circular coil depends directly upon the current and number of turns and inversely upon the radius of the coil .
a ray of light passing through the centre of curvature or seems to be incident on it . after reflection retraces its original path .
applications of solar cell panel i they provide electrical power for space crafts . its electricity charges batteries inside the craft . ii they provide energy to remote and isolated areas . iii they supply power to domestic electronic appliances like t . v . . radio sets . iv they provide electricity for street lightening and for operating water pumps . v they provide electricity to light houses situated in the sea and off shore drilling platform . vi solar cells are used to run calculator . watches . pendulum clock and other small instruments .
 what is the power of a convex lens of focal length cm ans . here . f cm p using . f in cm we have p . d do 
if power is given in kilowatt directly . then total cost power t h cost per unit x
advantages merits a they directly utilize solar energy . b they can work satisfactorily even in diffused radiations . c they need no maintenance . d they do not produce pollution .
resistors in series resistors in parallel req rę r r reg r r r₂ t
to generate electricity . the rotatory motion of the windmill is used to turn the turbine of the electric generator . the output of a single windmill is quite small and cannot be used for commercial purposes . therefore . a number of
eye . there are no light sensitive cells no rods or cones due to which no vision is possible at that spot . this is called blind spot . thus . blind spot is a small area of the retina insensitive to light where the optic nerve leaves the eye see figure . when the image of an object falls on the blind spot . it cannot be seen by the eye . it should be noted that there is an eye lid in front of the eye m studygear which is just like the shutter in a camera . when eye lid is open . light can enter the eye but hd when eye lid is closed . no light enters the eye . the space between cornea and eye lens is filled with a watery liquid called aqueous humour . and the space between eye lens and retina is filled with a transparent jelly like substance called vitreous humour which supports the back of the eye .
 what will be the focal length of a lens whose power is given as . d ans . here . p d
it should be noted that the connecting cable of an electrical appliance like an electric iron . electric kettle . water heater . room cooler or refrigerator contains three insulated copper wires of three different colours red . black and green . the red coloured wire is the live wire . the black wire is the neutral wire . whereas green wire is the earth wire see figure .
a device which gets heated by using sun s heat energy is called a solar heating device . a solar cooker and solar water heater are solar heating devices . though a large amount of sun s heat energy falls on the earth but it is very much diffused spread over a large area and not concentrated . so . in order to use sun s heat energy for heating purposes . we have to collect and concentrate it .
a bar magnet it is in the form of a rectangular bar or has a circular cross section .
 a prism of refractive index . is placed in water of refractive index . . if the angle of prism is . calculate the angle of minimum deviation in water . sin . . ans . here . ºuw . . ug . . a . . a m wug w . mg . . wug . sin m sin . m sin . . sin . . sin . sin . . . om . . 
 ii the air molecules nitrogen and oxygen gas molecules present in the atmosphere are smaller than the wavelength range of visible light . so . when light coming from the sun hits these very small air molecules . it behaves differently . since the different colours of white light have different wavelengths . so they are affected differently . the lower wavelength lights blues are scattered much more by the air molecules but the higher wavelength lights reds are scattered much less . thus . when white sunlight falls on the extremely small particles like air molecules present in the atmosphere . it is not scattered as white light . the molecules of air scatter mainly the lower wavelengths of light which have blue shades .
 . . natural gas deposits of natural gas occur in ways similar to those of crude petroleum oil . natural gas being lighter gets collected in the upward convex cavity in the cap rock . the crude oil remains at the bottom .
 i in the side ab of the rectangular coil abcd . the direction of current is from a to b see figure . and in the side cd of the coil . the direction of current is from c to d which is opposite to the direction of current in side ab . the direction of magnetic field is from n pole of the magnet to its s pole . by applying fleming s left hand rule to sides ab and cd of the coil we find that the force on side ab of the coil is in the downward direction whereas the force on side cd of the coil is in the upward direction . due to this the side ab of the coil is pushed down and side cd of the coil is pushed up . this makes the coil abcd rotate in the anticlockwise direction see figure .
the main advantages of solar cells are that they have no moving parts . they require almost no maintenance . and work quite satisfactorily without the use of any light focussing device . another advantage of solar cells is that they can be set up in remote . inaccessible and very sparsely inhabited areas where the laying of usual power transmission lines is difficult and expensive .
summary of the images formed by a convex lens position of object . between f and lens size of image enlarged nature of image virtual and erect . atf at focus . between f and f . at f . beyond f . at infinity position of image on the same side as object at infinity beyond f at f between f and f atf at focus highly enlarged enlarged same size as object diminished highly diminished real and inverted real and inverted real and inverted real and inverted real and inverted
construction of a motor an electric motor consists of a rectangular coil abcd of insulated copper wire . which is mounted between the curved poles of a horseshoe type permanent magnet m in such a way that it can rotate freely between the poles n and s on a shaft the shaft is a long cylindrical rotating rod at the centre of the coil which has not been shown in figure to keep the diagram simple . the sides ab and cd of the coil are kept perpendicular to the direction of magnetic field between the poles of the magnet . this is done so that the maximum magnetic force is exerted on the current carrying sides ab and cd of the coil . a device which reverses the direction of current through a circuit is called a commutator or split ring . the two ends of the coil are soldered or welded permanently to the two half rings x and y of a commutator . a commutator is a copper ring split into two parts x and y . these two parts are insulated from one another and mounted on the shaft of the motor . end a of the coil is welded to part x of the commutator and end d of the coil is welded to part y of the commutator . the commutator rings are mounted on the shaft of the coil and they also rotate when the coil rotates . as we will see later on . the function of commutator rings is to reverse the direction of current flowing through the coil every time the coil just passes the vertical position during a revolution . in other words . commutator rings reverse the direction of current flowing through the coil after every half rotation of the coil .
direction of magnetic field clock rule in the above case . on testing with a compass . it is found that the front face of the coil is a south pole and its back face is a north pole . the following rule . called the clock rule . helps us to determine the polarities of the faces of a current carrying coil .
when a soft iron core is used as a core material . a very strong magnetic field is produced . commonly an insulated wire is coiled over a non conducting hollow cylindrical tube . an iron rod is usually placed inside the hollow tube . this iron rod is called the core . a strong magnetic field produced inside a solenoid can be used to magnetize a piece of magnetic material . like soft iron . when placed inside the coil fig . . the magnet so formed is called an electromagnet .
domestic electric circuits or domestic wiring electricity is generated at the power station . it is brought to our homes by two thick copper wires or aluminium wires fixed over tall electric poles or by underground cables . from the electric pole situated in our street . two insulated wires l and n come to our house see figure . one of these wires is called live wire read as laa ive wire and it is at a high potential of volts whereas the other wire is called neutral wire and it is at the ground potential of zero volt . thus . the potential difference between the live wire and the neutral wire in india is volts . in figure . l is the live wire and n is the neutral wire . the live wire has red insulation covering whereas neutral wire has black insulation covering . there is no harm if we touch the neutral wire but we will get an electric shock if . by chance . we touch the live wire .
suppose we have a concave mirror of focal length cm . then its focus f will be at a distance of cm and its centre of curvature c will be at a distance of x cm from it . now . by saying that an object is placed beyond the centre of curvature of this concave mirror . we mean that the object is placed at a distance greater than cm say . cm from the concave mirror . and by saying that the image is formed between focus and centre of curvature . we mean that the image is formed at a distance between cm and cm .
 b wind energy is free of cost and hence devices operated by wind energy are economical . c this source of energy is a renewable source of energy .
wi k r relation between focal length f and radius of curvature r consider the given figure by law of reflection . i r . also i a . . . ii alternate angles in concave mirror and corresponding angles in convex mirror so by equations i and ii r a . . . iii and hence . af fc for paraxial rays . i . e . . rays very close to principal axis . point a lies close to pole p of mirror . so in that case af pf . . . iv by equations iii and iv . fc pf now . as pc pf fc or pc pf pf pf or r f i . e . . for paraxial rays in spherical mirrors . radius of curvature r is equal to twice of the focal length f . in a spherical mirror focal length f of the mirror is half the radius of curvature r of the mirror i . e . . f r r f from this . it is clear that the principal focus of a spherical mirror lies midway between the pole and centre of curvature .
cataract a yet another defect of the eye which usually comes in old age is the cataract . the medical condition in which the lens of the eye of a person becomes progressively cloudy resulting in blurred vision is
 . nuclear energy nuclear energy is the energy possessed by the nucleus of an atom . it is obtained by the conversion of nuclear mass . how is nuclear energy generated in a process called nuclear fission . the nucleus of a heavy atom such as uranium . plutonium or thorium . when bombarded with low energy neutrons . can be split apart into lighter nuclei . when this is done . a tremendous amount of energy is released . nuclear energy comes from two processes i nuclear fission and ii nuclear fusion
advantages of biogas plants a we get clean fuel from bio waste . b animal dung and organic waste is disposed off usefully . c spent slurry is used as manure in the fields .
or he or he h . . cm . cm . the image of the pin is . cm high . the minus sign shows that it is formed below the principal axis . as shown in figure . . in other words . it is an inverted image .
 . technical terms connected with spherical mirrors i pole or vertex p the central point of a mirror is called its pole or vertex . ii centre of curvature c the centre of the sphere of which the mirror is a part . is called the centre of curvature . it is denoted by c as shown in figure . . iii radius of curvature r the radius of the sphere of which the mirror is a part . is called the radius of curvature . it is denoted by r as shown in figure . .
the above experiment shows that when the direction of motion of wire in the magnetic field is reversed . then the direction of induced current is also reversed . please note that the direction of induced current in the wire can also be reversed by reversing the positions of the poles of the magnet which means that the direction of induced current can also be reversed by reversing the direction of magnetic field . we will now discuss why the movement of a wire in the magnetic field produces an electric current in the wire .
b fig . image formation by a convex lens when the object is placed between f . and f .
image of an extended object or finite object we have just studied that a plane mirror forms a point image of a point object . but most of the actual objects are much bigger than a mere point and they are called extended objects or finite objects . an extended object or bigger object can be considered to be made up of a very . very large number of point objects . so . the image of an extended object is a collection of the image points corresponding to the various points of the object . we will now describe how a plane mirror forms the image of an extended object . in our ray diagrams . we will use an arrow pointing upwards to represent an extended object or finite object .
linear magnification produced by mirrors the size of image formed by a spherical mirror depends on the position of the object from the mirror . the image formed by a spherical mirror can be bigger than the object . equal to the object or smaller than the object . the size of the image relative to the object is given by the linear magnification . this is discussed on the next page .
u ón fission . ba kr ón tremendous amount of energy heavy atom neutron medium weight atoms neutrons
when a lighted bulb is placed at the focus of a concave mirror reflector . the diverging light rays of the bulb are collected by the concave reflector and then reflected to produce a strong . parallel sided beam of light see figure a . this explains the use of concave reflectors in torches . car head lights . and
is converted into heat . all the electrical heating appliances have a heating element or heating coil made of high resistance wire like nichrome wire which helps in converting most of the electric energy into heat energy . we will now solve some problems based on the heating effect of current .
a fuse is connected in series with an appliance such as a tv or a group of appliances such as the lights and fans in a room . so . the current through the fuse is the same as the current through the appliance or the group of appliances . if this current exceeds a safe value . the heat produced in the fuse wire causes it to melt immediately . this breaks the circuit . preventing any damage . figure . shows examples of how a fuse is connected in circuits .
the photoelectric effect showed that light must have particle nature . one may regard light as having dual nature . light propagates as a wave and is emitted and absorbed as a particle .
fossil fuels t fuels that were formed from the remains of dead plants and animals are called fossil fuels . these were produced by complex processes with the help of a series of natural events over millions of years . the most widely used fossil fuels are coal . petroleum and natural gas . you know that plants trap solar energy in the form of food . and animals get energy when they eat the plants . since fossil fuels came from plants and animals . their ultimate source of energy is the sun . we get a number of different fuels from coal and petroleum . for example . we get petrol . diesel . kerosene and lpg from petroleum . and coke and natural gas from coal . when burnt in air . fossil fuels give off heat . which is used for various purposes from cooking to generating electricity . however . these fuels are nonrenewable . and their reserves are running out . unfortunately . we cannot repeat the events that led to their formation . fossil fuels have played an important role in the technological advances made in the last three hundred years or so . even today . most of the energy requirements of homes . industries and transport are met by fossil fuels . it is estimated that about of our total energy consumption comes from coal . more than of this coal is used for electricity generation in thermal power plants . in most thermal power plants . coal is burnt to heat water for producing steam . the steam falls on the blades of a special kind of wheel called a turbine . a turbine is a device that rotates when steam . water or wind falls on its blades . the turbine turns the shaft of an electric generator to which it is connected . in this way electricity is produced .
 iv principal axis the straight line passing through the pole and the centre of curvature of the mirror is called the principal axis . in figure . . pc is the principal axis . aperture or opening radius of curvature aperture centre of curvature principal axis principal axis vertex or pole vertex or pole a concave mirror b convex mirror fig . the technical terms connected with spherical mirrors .
 . reflection of light when a light ray travelling in a medium encounters a boundary leading into a second medium . part of the incident ray is thrown back into the original medium . this phenomenon is called reflection of light . in other words . the bouncing back of light when it strikes a smooth or polished surface is called reflection of light .
 . natural gas is used as a fuel in thermal power plants for generating electricity . . compressed natural gas cng is being used increasingly as a fuel in transport vehicles like cars . buses and trucks see figure . it is a good alternative to petrol and diesel because it does not cause any air pollution .
 . when the object lies beyond the centre of curvature c consider a ray starting from the top of the object and parallel to the principal axis . this ray after reflection from the mirror seems to come from the focus . another ray of light starting from the top of the object and travelling towards the centre of curvature reflects back on itself . the two rays when produced backwards seem to meet behind the mirror . this is the image of the object . fig . . this image formed is virtual . erect and diminished .
dispersion of light by a prism as with any transparent material . lights of different colours travel at different speeds in the material of a prism . hence . the refractive index of the material of a prism is different for different colours of light . so . when white light enters a prism . its different components lights of different colours bend by different amounts . this causes the components to separate out . or split . while emerging from the prism . they undergo a second refraction and bend further . increasing the separation between the colours . in this way . white light gets split into its component colours on passing through a prism . note that the component colours of white light bend by different amounts for all refractions . so . why does not light get split while passing through a rectangular slab light bends by equal angles but in opposite directions at the parallel faces of a rectangular slab . so . the components of light that split at the first refraction bend back and recombine to give white light after the second refraction .
some cases . the water gets converted to steam . steam or steam mixed with hot water pushes out of the surface of the earth with great force . the fountain of steam and water coming out from the surface of the earth is called a geyser . steam as well as hot water from geothermal sources can be utilized by us . some common uses include heating of buildings and generation of electricity .
sed uab rors sta . for a concave mirror nyerted and extremely diminished . i when the object lies beyond the centre of curvature . the image is real . inverted and diminished . ii when the object lies at the centre of curvature . the image is real . inverted and equal to the size of the object . i when the object lies between the focus and the centre of curvature . the image is real . inverted and bigger than the object . v when the object lies at the principal focus . the image is real . inverted and extremely magnified . v when the object lies between the pole and the principal focus . the image is virtual . erect and magnified . ses sere bere ce s dl less ge the im a tv r boob stas ber sede ele bis obrazards ecos esses . baddr sessues girone bass es s rese ser auto na stress il utc x oz s . es ensa . sor bro a eeeeee chers r sere sasaki vasara lore serer saran vn st ses ind fos illaoni see peserededor de getoets bas eror dores sanie stores redtb cs te babe pored bubu s buru rss ur . stro bos san ho
salient features of tree system of wiring
k r through resistance r will be i . the current passing through resistance r will be . and that through rz will be see figure . it is obvious that total current . i . suppose the resultant resistance of this combination is r . then . by applying ohm s law to the whole circuit . we get r . . . r ifr hema . . . since the potential difference v across all the three resistances r . r and r in parallel is the same . so by applying ohm s law to each resistance separately . we get v volts figure . and putting these values of i . . and in equation . we get v vvv rr r₂ r my studygear ahan . . . . . and so on . r r r cancelling v from both sides . we get r r r r thus . if three resistances r . r and r are connected in parallel . then their resultant resistance r is given by the formula r rr r similarly . when four resistances r . r . rz and r are connected in parallel . then their resultant resistance r is given by the formula r r r r and so on r let us solve some problems now .
working the food to be cooked is taken in the containers which are then placed inside the box . the containers are covered with the glass sheet . the cooker is placed in sunlight and position of the reflector is so adjusted that a strong beam of sunlight is reflected on the top covered with glass sheet . sunlight passes through transparent glass sheet and is absorbed by the black painted walls of the container and its box . the infrared radiations in the sunlight heat the box and the food inside the container . inside the box the temperature may go upto c to c in to hours and the food gets cooked .
 . . merits of solar cells following are the merits of solar cell . solar cells provide clean . cheap . noiseless and safe energy . . they have no moving parts hence require little maintenance and work quite satisfactorily without the use of any focussing device . . suitable for remote and inaccessible places where other fuels are scarce and costly . . suitable for portable or mobile load like . radio sets . cars . buses . spacecrafts etc . . reliable and long life . at least years . very low maintenance cost .
in the fission of uranium . the combined mass of the fission products is less than the combined mass of the neutron and the u nucleus . with which the reaction started . this loss in mass gets converted into energy . energy released in fission reactions you must have heard of einstein s famous equation . e mc² . in this equation . e . m and c stand for energy . mass and the speed of light in vacuum respectively . from this equation we can get the amount of energy released when matter of a certain mass is destroyed . taking c x m s in vacuum . kg of disappearing mass will give rise to x j of energy . when dealing with atoms and nuclei . scientists prefer to measure mass in a unit called atomic mass unit u . which is defined as of the mass of one atom of carbon . and they often use the unit electronvolt ev to measure energy . u . x kg . ev . x j . it turns out that u of mass . when converted into energy . releases about mev of energy . how much energy do we get from the fission of one uranium nucleus from the fission of one u nucleus . we get about x ev mev of energy . to get an idea of the amount of energy liberated by fission . let us do a comparison with energy released by burning coal . when g of coal is burnt completely . kj of energy is produced . a fission reaction that consumes g of u produces . x kj of energy the energy released in nuclear fission can be used to generate electricity as well as to make atom bombs .
solar energy the sun is the source of all energy . the sun provides us heat and light energy free of cost the energy obtained from the sun is called solar energy see figure . the nuclear fusion reactions taking place inside the sun keep on liberating enormous amounts of heat and light energy . this heat and light energy is radiated by the sun in all directions in the form of solar energy . the sun has been radiating an enormous amount of energy at the present rate for nearly billion years x years and will continue radiating
the current in each turn of a current carrying solenoid flows in the same direction due to which the magnetic field produced by each turn of the solenoid adds up . giving a strong magnetic field inside the solenoid . the strong magnetic field produced inside a current carrying solenoid can be used to magnetise a piece of magnetic material like soft iron . when placed inside the solenoid . the magnet thus formed is called an electromagnet . so . a solenoid is used for making electromagnets .
at the meter board in the house . these wires pass into an electricity meter through a main fuse . through the main switch they are connected to the line wires in the house . these wires supply electricity to separate circuits within the house . often . two separate circuits are used . one of a current rating for appliances with higher power ratings such as geysers . air coolers . etc . the other circuit is of a current rating for bulbs . fans . etc . the earth wire . which has insulation of green colour . is usually connected to a metal plate deep in the earth near the house . this is used as a safety measure . especially for those appliances that have a metallic body . for example . electric press . toaster . table fan . refrigerator . etc . the metallic body is connected to the earth wire . which provides a low resistance conducting path for the current . thus . it ensures that any leakage of current to the metallic body of the appliance keeps its potential to that of the earth . and the user may not get a severe electric shock .
coil coil odrom fig . current is induced in coil when current changes in coil .
illustrations what will be the colour of the emergent light when white light is incident on a thin walled hollow glass prism ans . the emergent light is white because the outer faces of the prism behave like hollow plates as shown in figure .
 . bar magnet and its properties a piece of substance . which possesses the property of attracting small pieces of iron towards it . is called a magnet . if the substance . has a regular shape of a parallelepiped of small thickness . then it is called a bar magnet . a bar magnet has two poles . north pole and south pole . these poles are situated at a small distance inwards from the two faces . a bar magnet possesses the following properties 
a ray of light passing through the focus . after reflection . becomes parallel to the principal axis .
reg fig . . thus . v ireq the potential differences v . v and v across the resistors r . r and r respectively are given by ohm s law as v ir v ir v ir since the resistors are in series . v v v v . substituting the values of the potential differences in the above equation . ireq ir ir ir ireq i r r r req r r r . similarly . for n resistors connected in series . or or equivalent resistance of resistors in series req r r r . . . r . . .
if f force on test charge q . then ě lim qia si unit of electric field is n c or volt meter . it is a vector quantity and at any point is directed in the direction of force f . the electric field strength at a distance r from a point charge q is . . p pz if q is positive . then ě is directed away from it and if q is negative . then ě is directed towards it .
in the above experiment we have seen that when a wire is moved between the poles of a fixed magnet . then an electric current is produced in the wire . the reverse of this is also true . that is . if a wire in the form of a coil is kept fixed but a magnet is moved inside it . even then a current is produced in the coil of wire . this point will become more clear from the following experiment .
biomass means any organic matter from which we can get energy on a renewable basis . . sess r a penas ca ce odore upas ordeel fig . cow dung gobar . biomass is another form in which solar energy manifests itself .
please note that water is also optically denser than air . so when a beam of light travelling in water enters into air . it bends away from the normal . we can show the refraction of light on going from water into air by using the ray diagram given in figure . all that we have to do is to write water in place of glass and show water by drawing some dotted lines . please draw the diagram to show the refraction of a ray of light from water to air
 . sou twinkling of stars twinkle . twinkle little star may have been the first rhyme you learnt . but maybe you are still wondering what makes stars twinkle . when we look at stars . quite often they do not appear to shine steadily . they disappear for a fraction of a second before reappearing the intensity of light from them fluctuates . or their positions seem to shift slightly in random directions . we call this the twinkling of stars . let us see why this happens . since the temperature of air and its humidity are not the same everywhere in the atmosphere . the refractive index of air varies between different masses or pockets of air . even at the same altitude . thus . there exist air pockets whose refractive index is different from that of the air surrounding it . when a ray of light passes through such a pocket of air . it bends due to refraction figure . . light from a star may pass through one or more air pockets before reaching the eye . but the air pockets keep moving . so . the direction of the ray reaching the eye keeps changing . causing the image of air pockets of different the star to shift in random directions or even densities disappear for an instant . the amount of starlight reaching the eye also keeps changing due to the shift in the direction of the light . so . the brightness of the star seems fig . . to change . the stars near the horizon twinkle more than those that are overhead . this is because light from a star near the horizon has to cover much more distance in the atmosphere than that from stars which are overhead . therefore . it has greater chances of encountering air pockets whose density is different from the surrounding air . why planets do not twinkle planets do not seem to twinkle like stars . although light coming from them also passes through the air pockets in the atmosphere . this is because stars appear as point objects to us due to their enormous distance from the earth . on the other hand . planets are comparatively nearer . and therefore . for us they are more like extended objects . light from different parts of the planet form an extended image at the eye . and we are unable to detect the random shifts in the smaller portions of this image . po so 
a concave mirror can form images which are smaller than the object . equal to the object or bigger than the object . therefore . the linear magnification or just magnification m produced by a concave mirror can be less than . equal to or more than . on the other hand . a convex mirror forms images which are always smaller than the object . so the linear magnification m produced by a convex mirror is always less than . a plane mirror forms images which are always of the same size as the object . therefore . the magnification m produced by a plane mirror is always .
power of a lens is defined as its ability to converge or diverge a beam of light falling on it . power is defined as the reciprocal of the focal length of a lens in metre .
potential is a scalar quantity . therefore . it is added algebraically . for a positively charged body potential is positive and for a negatively charged body potential is negative .
the electric energy consumed and its cost is calculated by using the following procedure . calculate the total power consumed . this is found out in watt . . now . the power is converted into kilowatt by dividing the power consumed by . this power consumed in kilowatt is multiplied by the time in hours for which the power is used . . this gives the electric energy consumed in kilowatt hour . . this is then multiplied by the cost of one unit of electric energy to give the total cost of electricity consumed .
energy sources which are inexhaustible are called renewable energy sources . wood . falling water . geothermal power . solar energy . wind energy . tidal energy are some examples of renewable sources of energy .
 magnetic field outside the volume of the infinite solenoid approaches to zero .
nuclear bomb atom bomb the highly destructive nuclear bomb or atom bomb is based on the nuclear fission reactions of uranium . in the nuclear bomb . the fission reaction of uranium or plutonium is deliberately allowed to go out of control so as to produce an enormous amount of energy in a very short time . this energy causes destruction all around . the atom bombs based on the fission of uranium and plutonium were dropped on the japanese cities of hiroshima and nagasaki . respectively in during the second world war . both these atom bombs caused a great loss of human life and property . about . lakh people were killed in these two atom bomb attacks .
early sunrise and late sunset consider an oblique ray from a heavenly body such as the sun or a star . while travelling through the atmosphere . it continuously moves into regions of higher refractive index . so . it continuously bends towards the normal . resulting in a path similar to that shown in figure . . since we see an object in the direction of the ray incident on the eye . the heavenly body appears higher than its actual position .
contains as much energy as about litres of gasoline . it is worth noting that the above fusion reaction is the source of sun s and other stars energy .
if the appliances are connected in series . then i the potential across each appliance will not be the same . ii if one of the appliances is switched off . all appliances will also be switched off . iii all appliances will work together even if we want only one appliance to work . ring system is shown in figure . .
lateral displacement the perpendicular distance between the original path of incident ray and the emergent ray coming out of a glass slab is called lateral displacement of the emergent ray of light . in the above figure . lm d . represents lateral displacement for a glass slab and is given by d sin i r where t thickness of slab cost
the conventional sources of energy may not be able to provide us energy for too long
renewable and non renewable sources of energy all the sources of energy can be divided into two main categories non renewable sources of energy those sources of energy which have accumulated in nature over a very very long time and cannot be quickly replaced when exhausted . are called non renewable sources of energy . for example . coal is a non renewable source of energy because coal has accumulated in the earth over a very very long time . and if all the coal gets exhausted . it cannot be produced quickly in nature . fossil fuels coal . petroleum and natural gas and nuclear fuels are non renewable exhaustive sources of energy .
do in vacuum . dispersion of light does not take place because all colours travel with you same speed in vacuum . know
 . when the object is at infinity consider two different rays coming from infinity . where the object is placed . these rays . after reflection from the mirror . converge at the focus to form the image of the distant object fig . . the image formed is real . inverted and extremely diminished in size . if the rays are not parallel to the principal axis . then the image is formed at the focal plane and is real . inverted and extremely diminished .
 r r r resistors . in figure three resistance wires ab . bc and cd are connected in series . suppose their resistances are respectively r . r and r . let the equivalent resistors of these resistances be r . suppose a current i is flowing in all the three resistors . suppose the potential differences between the ends of the resistors r . r and r are respectively v . v and vzd v ir . v ir and v ir . if the potential difference between a and d be v . then v v v v ir ir ir . . . i the equivalent resistance between a and d is r . therefore . v ir . . . ii comparing eq . i and ii . we get ir i r r r or r r r r that is . the equivalent resistance of the resistors connected in series is equal to the sum of those resistors . it is evident that in series the value of the equivalent resistance is greater than the individual value of each resistance .
what happens if we move the coil instead of the magnet fix the coil to a wooden block . and move it sharply towards the magnet . you will find that as long as the coil moves . there is a current in the coil . as indicated by the deflection of the needle of the galvanometer figure . a . and if you move the coil away from the magnet . the needle of the galvanometer gets deflected in the opposite direction figure . b . there is no deflection . i . e . . no current . when both of them are at rest .
 v as we move towards the centre of the coil . the strength of magnetic field increases . magnetic field is maximum at its centre . this is due to the reason that the two magnetic fields one due to the semicircular segment of the coil through a and the other due to the semicircular segment through b assist each other .
energy from biomass in the context of energy production . biomass means any organic matter from which we can get energy on a renewable basis . wood is a biomass fuel . wood can be more efficiently utilized by converting it into charcoal . biogas is a combustible mixture of gases produced by the decomposition of biomass . it is produced by the anaerobic digestion of biomass such as cattle dung . sewage . etc . biogas can contain up to methane . carbon dioxide and other gases . including hydrogen and hydrogen sulphide . this combustible mixture is an excellent renewable fuel that can be used for electricity generation and for cooking . advantages of biogas biogas plants are simple biogas is an excellent . clean fuel that burns without producing ash and smoke the spent slurry is good manure biogas plants are a safe and useful way of waste disposal use of biogas leads to saving of firewood . and reduces deforestation .
ho bre sebe co ser be der feladen ser fig . b iron filings that have been sprinkled onto the cardboard collect in concentric circles when current is sent through the copper wire .
complete one rotation . for example . when the arm ab is near the north pole . the downward force will turn it anticlockwise . and when it is near the south pole . the downward force will swing it back . clockwise . thus . the rotation will not be completed .
 i length of the conductor experiments show that resistance of a conductor is directly proportional to the length of the conductor . ral
object at distance twice the focal length real object ab has its image a b formed at distance f . the image is real . inverted and has same size as the object . convex lens object at f . image at f
the common element in all these experiments is changing magnetic field flux through the coil .
 iii the distances measured in the direction of the incident ray are taken as positive . while those measured opposite to the direction of the incident ray are taken as negative .
solar cookers a box type solar cooker is an insulated . air tight box covered with glass . its inner surface is painted black . and it has a plain mirror to increase incident sunlight . advantages inexpensive to own and operate . can cook food in several vessels simultaneously . reduces firewood and lpg consumption . does not produce smoke disadvantages can be used only during daytime . effective only in warm climates . ineffective in winters and on cloudy days . cannot use box type cookers to fry food or make roti .
fig . a wind energy farm .
thick wire a b c fig . . a set up to show that a current carrying conductor experiences a force in a magnetic field b position of the wire when no current passes through it . and c its position when it carries a current
emergent lateral displacement ray d air n n ri mi glass n a air nu sonondondong fig . when a ray of light passes through a pane of glass or a glass slab that has parallel surfaces and is surrounded by air . the emergent ray is parallel to the incident ray i e . but is laterally displaced .
 a v ceases to be proportional to figure a . b the relation between v and i depends on the sign of v . in other words . if i is the current for a certain v . then reversing the direction of v keeping its magnitude fixed . does not produce a current of the same magnitude as i in the opposite direction figure b . this happens . for example . in a diode . c the relation between v and i is not unique . i . e . . there is more than one value of v for the same current i . a material exhibiting such behaviour is gaas .
compounds containing oxygen . nitrogen and sulphur . thus . the crude petroleum oil is not a single chemical compound . it is a mixture of compounds . petroleum is lighter than water and insoluble in it . petroleum occurs deep down under the earth between two layers of impervious rocks non porous rocks . natural gas occurs above the petroleum oil trapped under the rocks . petroleum is obtained by drilling holes called oil wells into the earth s crust where the presence into the earth s crust where the presence
the size of the pupil varies with the help of iris to mm . in dim light . the size of the pupil increases with the help of iris to allow more light to enter the eye . in bright light . the pupil contracts to allow less light to enter into the eye . in other words . the iris regulates the amount of light entering the eye by dilating the pupil in light of low intensity and contracting the pupil in high intensity light fig . .
thus . the phenomenon due to which a magnetic field is produced around a current carrying conductor is magnetic effects of current . the direction of the deflection of the needle can be determined by any one of the following rules 
it should be noted that the adjustment of the size of the pupil takes some time . for example . when we go from a bright light to a darkened cinema hall . at first we cannot see our surroundings clearly . after a short time our vision improves . and we can see the persons sitting around us . this is due to the fact that in bright sunlight the pupil of our eye is small . so . when we enter the darkened cinema hall . very little light enters our eye and we cannot see properly . after
pole fuse before the electric lines enter a house . the agency supplying electricity . places a fuse called the pole fuse or company fuse in the live wire . the current rating of this fuse depends upon the load sanctioned by the agency to that house .
for a fission chain reaction to occur . the fissionable material must have a minimum mass . otherwise . neutrons will escape from the sample before they have the opportunity to strike another nucleus and cause additional fission . the chain stops if enough neutrons are lost . the amount of material is then said to be a subcritical mass . the amount of fissionable material large enough to maintain the chain reaction with a constant rate of fission is called the critical mass . when a critical mass of material is present . only one neutron from each fission is subsequently effective in producing another fission . the critical mass of uranium is about kg . the chain reaction multiplies the number of fission reactions showing very few secondary neutrons to escape if more than a critical mass of fissionable material is present . a mass in excess to critical mass is referred as super critical mass and this leads to a violent nuclear explosion .
we can determine the polarity of electromagnet shown in figure by using the clock face rule . if we view the electromagnet from its left end . we will see that the direction of current flowing in the coil is emil is
scientists believe that the source of geothermal energy lies in radioactive decay deep inside the earth . geothermal resources are classified as low temperature less than c or f moderate temperature c or f and high temperature greater than c or f . these resources range from shallow ground to areas several miles beneath the earth s surface where water and hot rock is found . and all the way down to the extremely molten rock called magma . the ways that these resources are used are influenced by temperature . those resources of high temperature are used for electric power generation . low and moderate temperature resources are used for direct use and heat pumps .
limitations of wind energy a we cannot depend upon wind energy as it is available only when air is in motion . the appliances or machines operating with wind energy stop working as soon as wind stops . the minimum speed of wind to operate generator to produce electricity is about km h . as soon as the speed of the wind becomes less than km h . the generator stops working . b there are certain regions where wind is not available . so the use of wind energy is limited to certain places where wind is in plenty and blows most of the time . c wind energy farms require a large area of land . d wind energy cannot be used to operate all types of machines . e windmills are usually broken during storms and hence lot of money is spent for the maintenance of a wind energy farm .
since it is easier to transmit electricity over long distances than to carry coal oil or gas over the same distance . therefore . many thermal power plants are established near coal fields or oil fields . we produce a major part of our electricity by burning fossil fuels . due to this . large amounts of fossil fuels coal . oil and gas are being burnt everyday at thermal power plants to generate electricity . because our supplies of coal . oil and gas are running out at a rapid rate . and because of the pollution caused by burning fossil fuels . other ways of generating electricity must be found . please note that electricity is not a fuel . it is a form of energy . at thermal power plants . it is the chemical energy of fossil fuels coal . oil and gas which is transformed into electrical energy .
bulb is filled with a chemically unreactive gas like argon or nitrogen or a mixture of both . the gases like argon and nitrogen do not react with the hot tungsten filament and hence prolong the life of the filament of the electric bulb . it should be noted that most of the electric power consumed by the filament of an electric bulb appears as heat due to which the bulb becomes hot . only a small amount of electric power
 . . biomass out of the total solar energy radiant on the earth s surface . a small fraction of it is converted into chemical energy by green plants through a process called photosynthesis . this energy becomes available in the form of biomass stored in different parts of plant . biomass means any organic matter from which we can get energy on a renewable basis . this includes agricultural crop residues . wood . animal excreta . wastes from food processing . municipal wastes . and trees and crops grown specifically for energy purposes . agricultural residues include straw . hay and husk . waste from food processing includes bagasse . which is the residue left after extracting the juice from sugar cane . cow dung gobar has been a traditional biomass fuel in our country . biomass is another form in which solar energy manifests itself .
why is the secondary rainbow fainter than the primary rainbow ans . light suffers two total internal reflections in the formation of secondary rainbow . so more of light intensity is absorbed .
for many materials e . g . . metals . the ratio v i is the same for a given piece of material over a wide range of voltages and currents . in such a case . the resistance is a constant and the relation r v i is referred to as ohm s law . after the german physicist george simon ohm . who discovered it . the above relation is an empirical formula which relates the current flowing through a conductor to the potential difference applied across it .
cause of astigmatism this defect occurs when the cornea is not perfectly spherical in shape . it may have a large curvature in the vertical plane than in the horizontal plane or vice versa . if one looks at a wire mesh with such a defect in the eye lens . focussing in the vertical plane may not be as sharp as in the horizontal plane or vice versa . astigmatism results in lines in one direction well focussed while those in perpendicular direction will be distorted or curved . as shown in figure a 
 c the energy of flowing water is renewable source of energy .
 . ray diagrams for formation of image by a concave mirror an object can be placed anywhere in front of a concave mirror to obtain its image . keeping in view . the above points . the image formed by a concave mirror for various positions of the object is discussed as under 
electric cable or overhead wires the electric power to a house is supplied either through overhead wires or through underground cables . the cable has three separate insulated wires a live wire or phase or positive . b neutral wire or negative and c earth wire . the live wire has usually red insulation cover . neutral wire has black insulation cover and the earth wire has green insulation cover . as per the new international convention . live wire has brown coloured insulation cover whereas neutral and earth wires have light blue and green or yellow insulation covers . the potential difference between the live and neutral wire is v . the neutral and the earth wires are connected together at the local sub station so that both of them are at zero potential .
 . . liquefied petroleum gas lpg the main constituent of petroleum gas is butane . which gives out a lot of heat when burnt . butane is easily liquefied under high pressure . in the liquid form . it is supplied in cylinders and is commonly known as liquefied petroleum gas lpg . our domestic gas cylinders contain a mixture of liquefied butane . propane and ethane hydrocarbons . a domestic gas cylinder contains about kg of lpg . smaller cylinders are also available . a strong smelling substance called ethyl mercaptan chsh is added to the lpg to detect the leakage of gas from the cylinder . when the regulator valve of the gas cylinder and the knob of the stove are opened . the pressure over the liquid in the cylinder decreases . as a result . some of it vaporises and reaches the burner through a tube connecting the cylinder to the stove . on being lighted . the gas burns with a blue flame . one gram of lpg produces about kj of heat . it is a clean burning fuel that does not produce pollutants like carbon monoxide and ash .
conventional and non conventional sources of energy sources of energy on the basis of their usability by man . are classified as conventional sources of energy the sources which are used extensively since ancient times and major portion of our energy requirement are met by them e . g . . fossil fuels and hydroenergy are known as conventional sources of energy . biomass energy and wind energy are also conventional sources of energy .
nature of image real . inverted and extremely diminished in size real . inverted and diminished real . inverted and equal to the size of the object real . inverted and bigger than object . real . inverted and extremely magnified virtual . erect and magnified .
windmills are erected over a large area . which is known as wind energy farm fig . . the energy output of each windmill in a farm is coupled together in series to get electricity on a commercial scale . the minimum wind velocity required is about km h . the overall effectiveness of wind farms depends on the distribution of wind speed over the year .
 . . hypermetropia a person suffering from this defect can see distant objects clearly but cannot see nearby objects clearly . in this defect . the near point lies farther away than cm .
another fuel which has a lower percentage of hydrogen in it . for example . lpg has a higher percentage of hydrogen than coal . so lpg has a higher calorific value than coal . we will now describe the ignition temperature of a fuel . we know that a fuel has to be burnt to obtain heat energy . now . before a fuel can catch fire and burn .
we can stop the wastage of energy . for example . by switching off lights . fans . coolers . etc . . when they are not in use . in large cities . sharing a car with other people going to work in the same area or using public transport can save a lot of fuel . many such commonsense things can be done to save energy . think about this making sure that taps do not leak saves the energy used in pumping extra water .
heating element made of nichrome has a high resistance and produces a lot of heat on passing current . ii nichrome does not undergo oxidation or burn easily even at high temperature . due to this nichrome wire can be kept red hot without burning or breaking in air .
prism quite often we use a glass prism to split white light . a glass prism is a five sided solid with a triangular cross section . thus . it has two parallel . triangular faces and three rectangular faces that are inclined to each other . in experiments . a prism is usually placed on one of its triangular faces such that its rectangular faces are vertical . light falling on a rectangular face adfc in figure . enters the prism and emerges from another rectangular face befc . figure . shows the cross section of a prism on which a ray of light pq is incident . the ray pq makes an angle i with the normal to the surface at q . since the ray enters glass optically denser medium from air . it bends towards the normal . hence . the ray bends towards the base ab . within the prism . the ray travels along qr . and falls on the surface cb at r . at this surface . the ray passes from glass to air . and hence . it bends away from the normal . as a result . the ray bends further towards the base ab . note that for the refraction at the second surface in a prism . it is a convention to denote the angle of incidence by r and the angle of refraction by in . fig . . a ray of light passing through a prism 
case . image formed by a concave mirror when the object is placed between pole and focus of the mirror object between p and f 
 iv concave mirrors are used as doctor s head mirrors to focus light coming from a lamp on to the body parts of a patient such as eye . ear . nose . throat . etc . to be examined by the doctor .
if instead of water . we take some other transparent liquid such as kerosene or turpentine in the above two experiments . then the bending of stick or raising of coin will appear to take place by different amounts than that in water . this is because light is refracted by different amounts in different liquids .
experiment to demonstrate the force acting on a current carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field the kicking wire experiment a thick copper wire ab is suspended vertically from a support t by means of a flexible joint j figure . the lower end b of this wire is free to move between the poles of a u shaped magnet m . the lower end b of the wire just touches the surface of mercury kept in a shallow vessel v so that it can move when a force acts on it . the positive terminal of a battery is connected to end a of the wire . the circuit is completed
the eye construction and working now that you know the basics of image formation by lenses . you will be able to understand how our eyes work . the eye performs three functions it makes adjustments to admit appropriate amount of light . it bends the rays of light to form a sharp image . and it collects and sends information about the image to the brain for further processing . different parts of the eye perform these functions . figure . a shows schematically the basic components of the human eye . the different parts of the eye are contained within the spherical eyeball . which is about . cm in diameter . an opaque . white . protective membrane called the sclera covers most of the outer part of the eyeball . this is what we call the white of the eye . a small portion at the front of the eyeball bulges out . a transparent protective membrane called the cornea covers this portion . behind the cornea the major structures of the eye are the iris . which controls the amount of light entering the eye . the crystalline lens . which helps in bending light . and the retina . on which the image is formed . as you can see from the diagram . the lens divides the eye into two chambers . the smaller of these two is between the cornea and the lens . it is filled with a watery fluid called
an electric motor is a device which converts electric energy into mechanical energy . a dc motor is based on the principle that a current carrying conductor placed in a uniform magnetic field experiences a force . the direction of this force being given by fleming s left hand rule .
measurement of current the charge passing per unit time through a given place is the magnitude of the electric current at that place . thus . . . . . here q is the charge that passes through a place in time t . unit of current from equation . . we find that current is charge divided by time . the si unit of charge is the coulomb and that of time is the second . the si unit of current . therefore . is coulomb second . this unit is called the ampere . whose symbol is a . thus . if one coulomb of charge passes through a place in one second . the current there is ampere . the ampere is named a
why a change in speed of light causes refraction of light or bending of light . the refraction of light or change in direction of light on going from one medium to another can be explained by using the wave theory of light . a beam of light is made up of tiny waves . when a beam of light consisting of light waves and travelling in a certain medium falls obliquely at an angle on the boundary of another medium . then one part of the light waves enters into the other medium first and its speed changes first but the rest of waves enter the other medium a little later and hence its speed changes a little later . the fact that the speed of light waves on one side of a beam of light changes a little before the change in speed of light waves on its other side . causes a change in the direction of light . and this change in direction of light is called refraction of light or bending of light . this will become more clear from the following example in which a beam of light is entering from air into a glass slab obliquely and then emerging into air from its other side .
real image real image is formed . when reflected or refracted light rays actually intersect at a point . . real image can be obtained on a screen . real image is inverted . i in case of mirror real image is formed in front of a mirror . ii in case of lens real image is formed on the other side of a lens .
suppose we have two fuels a and b . the calorific value of fuel a is kj g and its ignition temperature is c whereas the calorific value of fuel b is kj g and its ignition temperature is c . now . we find that fuel a has a higher calorific value of kj g than that of fuel b . so . at first sight it would appear that fuel a is a better fuel than fuel b . but it is not so . this is because fuel a has a very low ignition temperature of c due to which it can catch fire easily and hence it is unsafe to use . on the other hand . though the calorific value of fuel b is little less than that of fuel a . but it has the right ignition temperature of c which is neither very low nor very high . so . here fuel b will be a better fuel on the basis of its appropriate ignition temperature .
the source of nuclear energy is the mass of nucleus . a small amount of mass of nucleus is destroyed during a nuclear reaction which gets converted into a tremendous amount of energy . the nuclear energy is released mainly in the form of heat and some light . the nuclear energy is also known as atomic energy because it can be considered to be coming from the atoms . we will now describe the nuclear reactions of fission and fusion in detail . one by one . let us start with nuclear fission .
solar cooker the solar cooker is a device which is used to cook food by utilising the heat energy radiated by the sun . a solar cooker consists of an insulated metal box or wooden box which is painted all black from inside see figure . there is a thick glass sheet cover over the box and a plane mirror reflector is also attached to the box as shown in figure . the food to be cooked is put in metal containers which are painted black from outside . these metal containers are then placed inside the solar cooker box and covered with the glass sheet . we will now describe how the solar cooker works .
consider a ray of light pq incident on surface ab of a glass slab . let zpqn i be the angle of incidence on the surface ab . this ray of light is refracted into the glass slab along the path qr . let zmqr be the angle of refraction at the surface cd . the ray qr is now refracted out of the glass slab along the direction rs such that for this refraction zqrm r is the angle of incidence at surface cd and zn . rs e . be the angle of emergence at the surface cd .
circuit diagram in an electric circuit . we use a dry cell or a battery . a bulb . a plug key . an ammeter . voltmeter and connecting wires etc . a diagram showing the arrangement of various components in an electric circuit with the help of their symbols is known as circuit diagram . shows the schematic diagram of a typical electric circuit comprising a cell . an electric bulb . an ammeter and a plug key . note that the electric current flows in the circuit from the positive terminal of the cell to the negative terminal of the cell through the bulb and ammeter .
 v concave dishes are used in tv dish antennas to receive tv signals from the distant communications satellites . the concave dish collects a lot of tv signals and focusses them on to an antenna or aerial fixed at its focus . so as to produce strong signals to run the television .
a ray of light parallel to the principal axis . after reflection . passes through the principal focus or seems to come from it .
defects of vision as with any organ of the body . the eye can also develop problems . the inability to see nearby objects clearly and the inability to see faraway objects clearly are among the most common defects of vision .
to both the faces of the lens . in figure . the line f f is the principal axis of the convex lens and it passes through the optical centre c .
kind of conductor . we can also call it a resistor . it is clear from the above discussion that a common source of potential difference or voltage is a cell or a battery . it can make the current flow in a circuit .
box type solar cooker principle a box type solar cooker is based on the following facts i glass possesses the property of selective transmission of heat radiation . ii a black body is a good absorber of heat radiation . iii a mirror or a polished surface reflects heat radiation according to the laws of reflection .
scattering of lights of different colours the colours of light scattered by a suspended particle depends on the size of the particle . very small particles scatter lights of shorter wavelengths better than those of longer wavelengths . from table . it is clear that bluish lights have shorter wavelengths than reddish lights . when white light is incident on small suspended particles . more of the shorter wavelengths of light bluish lights get scattered . very little of longer wavelengths of light reddish lights get scattered . so . the remaining light is reddish . the scattering of longer wavelengths of light increases as the size of the particles increases . large particles scatter lights of all wavelengths equally well . when smoke contains very fine particles of ash . the bluish lights get scattered . and the smoke looks milky blue . if the particles of ash are large . the entire light incident on it gets scattered . then the smoke looks white . clouds look white because of scattering by large drops of water in it .
 rules for image formation in lenses using ray diagrams for geometrical construction of an image formed by a lens . any of three of following rays of light are used incident on the lens parallel to principal axis after refraction from the lens . it actually passes through second principal focus f in case of a convex lens or appears to come from the second principal focus f in case of a concave lens . object at infinity . image at focus f incident on the lens through first principal focus fi in case of a convex lens or in direction of first principal focus f in case of a concave lens after refraction from the lens . it goes parallel to the principal axis . object at focus fį . image at infinity incident on the lens in direction of optical centre it passes undeviated through the lens . f convex lens concave lens these special rays are very useful in drawing ray diagram in different cases .
 b how long will sun last the sun radiates energy at the rate of . w . since billion years . calculations have shown that the mass of the sun will exhaust in billion years more . hence solar energy will last till that large span of time . it is for this reason that we call solar energy as renewable non depletable . earth receives solar energy of about . kw m² .
 . . uses of solar cells . solar cells are used for providing electricity in artificial satellites and space probes . . solar cells are being used for street lighting . traffic signals . operating water pumps . for running tv . radios in remote area . . solar cells are being used in operating electronic watches and calculators . . solar cells are being used to provide electricity to lighthouses situated in the sea and off shore oil drilling rig platforms . the solar cell panels are mounted on specially designed inclined rooftops so that more solar energy is incident over it . the domestic use of solar cells is . however . limited due to its high cost .
we know that an object say . a chair kept in a room can be seen from all the parts of the room . this is due to the fact that usually . because of its rough surface . an object reflects light or scatters light in all the directions . since the reflected light reaches all the parts of the room . the object can be seen from all the parts of the room . if . however . the surface of an object is smooth like that of a mirror . then the light falling on it is reflected in only one direction as shown in figure .
we define the electric potential difference between two points in an electric circuit carrying some current as the work done to move a unit positive charge between the two points . potential difference v between two points work done w charge q if a work w is done in bringing a charge q from infinity to a point in an electric field . then potential at that point is given . w . . . . 
competition window astigmatism it is a defect of vision in which a person cannot simultaneously see both the horizontal and vertical views of an object with the same clarity . this defect can occur alongwith myopia or hypermetropia .
it may be mentioned here that the pollution caused by burning oil based products is more difficult to control than that produced by burning of coal . this is due to the reason that oil based fuels such as gasoline and diesel are burnt in moving vehicles . on the other hand . coal is burnt mainly in factories and thermal plants which cause pollution at a particular place . this pollution can be controlled more easily by installing tall chimneys and electrostatic precipitators . in addition . burning of gasoline also produces poisonous lead compounds . this type of pollution is not caused by burning of coal .
potential difference v across the wires is the same . you can of course verify this by connecting a voltmeter across ab . the different wires used in this experiment drew different currents when the same potential difference was applied across them . this means . the resistance of a wire of given length and cross sectional area depends on the material of the wire .
 i from point a . we draw an incident ray ac perpendicular to the mirror see figure . this will be reflected back along the same path . so . ca is the first reflected ray . we now draw another incident ray ad which strikes the mirror at point d . the ray ad is reflected along de . making an angle of reflection ri equal to the angle of incidence ii . thus . de is the second reflected ray here . we produce the two reflected rays ca and de backwards by dotted lines . they meet at point a a dash . so . a is the virtual image of the top point a of the object .
axis windmill for producing electricity wind generator electricity is produced when an armature of a horizontal armature of generator rotates between two poles north and wind generator south poles of a strong magnet . when wind falls electricity on the wheel of a windmill . it rotates . the axle of the armature is connected to the shaft of the wind mill . so the armature of the generator rotates between two poles of a magnet along with the pole rotation of the wheel of the windmill . thus . electric current is produced . this is how . the kinetic energy of the wind is converted into electric energy . it may be noted that electricity produced by a single windmill is very small . which cannot be used for commercial purpose . to produce electricity in a region . large number of windmills are installed . the region where large number of windmills are erected to produce electricity is called wind energy farm . the small amount of electricity produced by each generator connected to each windmill is combined to get electricity on a large scale .
side . the silver coating is protected by a red paint . these days mirrors are being made increasingly by depositing a thin coating of aluminium metal at the back of a glass sheet instead of silver coating . this is because aluminium is much cheaper than silver and it reflects light very well . a plane mirror is shown in figure a . the mirror on our dressing table in which we see our face is a plane mirror .
electricity from the ocean in tidal power plants . water of the rising tide is collected in a reservoir . when the tide ebbs . the
 a fig . a ray falling on the pole is reflected in accordance with the laws of reflection . although four different rays are shown to locate an image . only two are really needed the third or the fourth ray is usually drawn to serve as a check . in a similar fashion . rays from all points of the object locate corresponding points on the image . and the mirror forms a complete image of the object . the image is real if the light rays actually pass through a point and the image is virtual if the light rays seem to come from a point . in all the above reflections taking place the laws of reflection are strictly obeyed .
motor and generator many electrical devices are based on the relationship between electricity and magnetism . two of the most important ones are the electric motor and the electric generator . fans . mixies . cd players . motorized toys . etc . . use motors . motors are of different types . some . like the motor in a toy car . work only on batteries . while others . like the motor of an electric pump . work on the household electric supply . actually . the currents drawn from a battery and the household supply are different in nature . when an electrical device such as a bulb is connected to a battery . the current in the circuit always flows from the positive terminal higher potential of the battery to the negative terminal lower potential . a current that always flows in the same direction through an electrical device is called a direct current dc . however . the direction of the current flowing through the bulb of a reading lamp connected to the household supply changes rapidly every second . such a current is called an alternating current ac . electric motors and generators that work on dc or ac are only slightly different in construction . the principles of physics
some important conclusions according to the sign convention . the distances towards the left of the mirror are negative . since an object is always placed to the left side of a mirror . therefore . the object distance u is always negative .
a solenoid is a long . helically wound coil of insulated copper wire . a solenoid is shown in figure a .
factors affecting the resistance of a conductor the electrical resistance of a conductor or a wire depends on the following factors i length of the conductor . ii area of cross section of the conductor or thickness of the conductor . iii nature of the material of the conductor . and iv temperature of the conductor . we will now describe how the resistance depends on these factors .
nuclear fusion the process of combination of two light nuclei to form a heavy nucleus is known as nuclear fusion . obviously . the process of fusion is just the reverse of fission . an important feature of fusion is that there is a release of huge amount of energy in the process . this can be easily understood . when two light nuclei combine to form a heavy nucleus . there occurs a small mass defect . in other words . the mass of the heavy nucleus turns out to be less than the sum of the masses of two light nuclei . this small mass defect results in the release of a huge amount of energy according to einstein mass energy relation ae am c for example . by the fusion of two nuclei of heavy hydrogen or deuterium h . the following reaction is possible h² h² h² h . mev
case . when the object is at infinity when the object is at a very large distance . we say that the object is at infinity . in figure we have a concave mirror m . suppose an object an arrow pointing upwards has been placed at infinity in front of the concave mirror since the object is very far off . it cannot be shown in the diagram . because the object ab is very far off . the two rays ad and ap coming from its top point a are parallel to one another but at an angle to the principal axis as shown in figure . these parallel rays get reflected at points d and p and then intersect at point a in the focal plane of the mirror . thus . a is the real image of the top point a of the object . to get the full image of the object . we draw a b perpendicular to the principal axis from a . thus . a b is the image of the object ab placed at infinity . we find that image a b is formed at the focus f of the concave mirror .
let us take the reciprocal of this equation . this will give us º n v . . . . . . . now . if we compare equations and . we find that their right hand sides are equal . so their left hand sides should also be equal . thus . m this can also be written as medium n medium medium n medium this means that the refractive index for light going from medium to medium is equal to the reciprocal of refractive index for light going from medium to medium . if medium is air and medium is glass . then the above relation can be written as air n glass glass nair or ng na g thus . the refractive index of glass for light going from air to glass is the reciprocal of the refractive index for light going from glass to air . let us solve some problems now .
images formed by a convex mirror in a convex mirror . the image is always formed behind the mirror . between the pole and the focus . the image is always virtual . erect and smaller than the object . as the object moves away from the mirror . its image moves towards the focus . and when the object is at infinity . the image is formed at the focus . image formation by a convex mirror is shown in table . . if you place a small plane mirror in front of a large building . you will be able to see only a part of the building in the mirror . however . if you place a convex mirror of small focal length at the same place . you may be able to see the whole building . that is because convex mirrors form images that are smaller than the objects . so we are able to see the images of wide areas in them . after going through the tables on the formation of images by spherical mirrors . you would have noticed that the real images formed by spherical mirrors are always inverted and the virtual images are always erect .
if the two spheres are connected by a metal wire . electrons from the negatively charged sphere at a lower potential will flow to the positively charged sphere at a higher potential . eventually . the flow of electrons causes the charges on the spheres to become balanced . when that happens . the spheres no longer carry a net charge . and therefore . have equal potential . so . the flow of electrons stops . we can thus say that a potential difference causes charges to flow .
 . . limitations of hydroelectricity the following are the limitations of hydroelectricity i hydro energy power project is a huge project . ii high rise dams are constructed on rivers which may give rise to a number of environmental problems . for example . in order to carry out the project huge dams are required and the construction of which destroys natural flora and fauna as well as human settlements . iii aquatic animals are widely affected due to the construction of dams because they do not get sufficient nutrient materials in the downstream areas which further decrease the production of fish . iv the construction of dams also stops the flow of nutrient rich silt to the plains . this deteriorates the quality of soil and hence the quality of crops . v a hydroelectric power stations cannot be constructed everywhere . vi in construction of dams the vegetation which is submerged rots under anaerobic conditions and gives rise to large amounts of methane which is also a greenhouse gas . vii it creates the problem of satisfactory rehabilitation of displaced people .
song rete bebe moda essence seoa helsea stusesseresse holdes in . sess orari se san to carentes besed ssos ssssss ssssssssss selber benz uab b fig . laser beams undergo reflection from a concave mirror and b image formed by the concave surface of a spoon .
when light is going from vacuum to another medium . then the value of refractive index is called the absolute refractive index . the absolute refractive index has only one subscript with its symbol n on its right side which indicates the name of the medium the word vacuum is not written as a subscript . for example . for the light going from vacuum into glass . the absolute refractive index of glass is represented as nglass and not as vacuumnglass . the symbol nglass means that it is the refractive index of glass with respect to vacuum . that is . it is the refractive index of glass for light entering from vacuum into glass . please note that the symbol nglass is also written in short as ng .
focal length the distance between the optical centre of the lens and the principal focus first or second of the lens . is called focal length of the lens . it is represented by the symbol f . in diagram . of f . thinner lens convex thicker lens convex 
of the magnetic field . the strength of the magnetic field of an electromagnet depends upon the same factors as that of a solenoid . in fact . an electromagnet is a solenoid with an iron core at its centre .
nuclear energy the process of a heavy nucleus splitting into two middleweight nuclei is called nuclear fission . u absorbs a slow neutron to become u . which splits fissions to give about mev of energy . a reaction that continues on its own as one occurrence of the reaction triggers the next occurrence is called a chain reaction . controlled chain reaction is used in nuclear power plants . to generate electricity . the energy released by nuclear fission in a nuclear reactor is used to generate steam . which drives turbines connected to generators . the process of two or more light nuclei combining to form a heavier nucleus is called nuclear fusion . energy in the sun is produced by the fusion of hydrogen into helium . scientists are working hard to produce energy from fusion reactions . the high temperatures about k required for fusion is posing many problems .
uses of convex mirrors i convex mirrors are used as rear view mirrors in vehicles like cars . trucks and buses to see the traffic at the rear side or back side see figure . a driver prefers to use a convex mirror as rear view mirror because of two reasons a a convex mirror always produces an erect right side up image of the objects . b the image formed in a convex mirror is highly diminished or much smaller than the object . due to which a convex mirror gives a wide field of view of the traffic behind see figure a . a convex mirror enables a driver to view much larger area of the traffic behind him than would be possible with a plane mirror . a plane mirror gives a narrow field of view see figure b . due to this if a plane mirror
ff s nssn n n su nt n fig . like poles repel each other and unlike poles attract each other .
fig . image formation when the object lies at the centre of curvature .
since air surrounds the glass slab . therefore . ni n . also . r . therefore . equation . reduces to sin i sin e therefore . i e . this shows that the emergent ray is parallel to the incident ray . however . the figure shows that the emergent ray is displaced laterally relative to the incident ray . this is termed as lateral displacement . the extent of the lateral displacement is i directly proportional to the thickness of glass slab . ii directly proportional to the angle of incidence . iii directly proportional to the refractive index of glass slab . iv inversely proportional to the wavelength of incident light .
real and virtual images consider the situation shown in figure . a . a concave mirror reflects rays of light coming from the point a . the reflected rays intersect at the point a . to a person s eye located beyond a . the reflected rays will appear to come from a . hence . the eye will see an image of a at a . if a screen is placed at a . the rays will intersect on the screen . forming an image on it . an image formed by the actual intersection of light rays is called a real image . a real image can be formed on a screen . in figure . b . a convex mirror reflects the rays starting from the point b . the reflected rays do not actually intersect . but when produced backwards . they meet at the point b . to the eye receiving the reflected rays . they appear to come from b . and hence . an image is seen there . unlike the situation shown in figure . a . no light reaches b . where the image is formed . such an image . as you know . is called a virtual image . if the rays of light responsible for an image do not
at a particular distance . the star on the left will disappear . at that distance light from the star is falling only on the blind spot of your left eye . and hence . you cannot see it . now look at the star . with your left eye covered . at a particular distance . the triangle will disappear .
ans . two wires have same length . and resistance . as the specific resistances are unequal . the areas are different . for copper wire . rcu pcu ora acu for aluminium wire . rai pal . palaa v pal al so . pcu acu so . peu acta palma aal pal . x acu pcu . x 
atomic mass unit amu the mass of an atom is very small . compared to a kilogram . therefore . a different mass unit is used for expressing atomic masses i . e . . atomic mass unit u . one atomic mass unit u is defined as th of the actual mass of carbon atom . it is denoted by amu or only u .
at the time of sunrise and sunset when the sun is near the horizon . the sunlight has to travel the greatest distance through the atmosphere to reach us . during this long journey of sunlight . most of the shorter wavelength blue colour present in it is scattered out and away from our line of sight . so . the light reaching us directly from the rising sun or setting sun consists mainly of longer wavelength red colour due to which the sun appears red see figure . due to the same reason . the sky surrounding the rising sun and setting sun also appears red . thus . at sunrise and sunset . the sun itself as well as the surrounding sky appear red .
the porcelain grip is provided with two rectangular copper clamps c and c which fit tightly on terminal tį and t . a fuse wire is fixed between the clamps . when the grip is inserted into the casing . the circuit is completed as shown in the figure a . when the circuit gets overloaded or there is a voltage fluctuation or short circuit . the fuse wire melts and the current will stop flowing as shown in figure b . the circuit is made usable by inserting fresh fuse wire by taking out the grip from the casing .
formation of image by plane mirror the image formed by the mirror is a virtual image and it is erect up right . the image in a plane mirror lies as far behind the mirror as the object is in front of the mirror . i . e . . object distance u image distance v .
electric current is the amount of charge that crosses per unit time through a surface . in much the same sense that a river current is the amount of water flowing per unit of time . thus . electric current is defined as the rate of flow of electric charge i . e . . quantity of charge flowing per unit time . suppose q is the amount of charge that passes through the surface in a time t . here . q is given by q ne . where n is the number of electrons and e is the charge on each electron . if the rate is constant . the current i is equal to the charge divided by the time . . . . since the units for charge and time are the coulomb c and the second s respectively . therefore . the si unit for current is a coulomb per second c s . one coulomb per second is referred to as an ampere a . after the french mathematician andre marie ampere .
over different isotopes of different elements have been found among the fission products of uranium . most of them are radioactive . the schematic representation of the fission of uranium . showing one of its many fission patterns . has been given in figure . on the average . . neutrons are produced by every fission of u . if one fission produces neutrons . these two neutrons can cause two fission on hitting another u nucleus . the neutrons thereby released can produce four fission and so on .
 . it is used as a security mirror in shops and on roads at sharp bends and concealed entrances . cesorios bbs ecocrepeego bare sere ges orer g sace cos teleccio besloten regeri fig . convex mirrors are used as security mirrors in shops and on roads at sharp bends and concealed entrances .
how can you account for such experiences in case of the pencil the light reaching you from the portion of the pencil inside water seems to come from a different direction . compared to the part of the pencil above water . this makes the pencil appear to be displaced at the interface .
to get the image of b . we join b to p figure . wb . suppose a ray is incident along bp . the angle of incidence is bpm . draw the reflected ray pb . making the angle mpb the angle bpm . the intersection of this ray with a n will be the image b of the point b . we can now measure the length a b . it is close to . cm . so . the size of the image is . cm x . cm . to get the focus . we draw a line bd parallel to the principal axis figure . wc . join d to b . db is the reflected ray corresponding to the incident ray bd . as bd is parallel to the principal axis . the reflected ray cuts the principal axis at the focus . so . we get the focus f . the length pf can now be measured . it is close to . cm . the focal length of the mirror is . therefore . approximately . cm x . cm .
rule . a ray of light passing through the optical centre of a concave lens goes straight after passing through the lens . this is shown in figure . the ray of light ac is passing through the optical centre c of concave lens . this ray of light goes straight in the direction cy after passing through the concave lens . it does not bend at all . please note that a ray of light along the principal axis of a conave lens also goes straight .
solar cells a device which converts solar energy directly into electricity is called a solar cell or a photovoltaic pv cell . some substances like silicon are semiconductors . their ability to conduct electricity is much less than that of conductors . however . when certain substances are added to semiconductors . they are able to conduct electricity much better . solar cells are made from such altered semiconductors . when sunlight falls on a solar cell . a potential difference of about . v develops across it . the power of a solar cell depends on its surface area . the greater the surface area of the solar cell . the greater is the solar energy collected by it . and hence . the greater is the power generated . small solar cells are . therefore suitable for use in only those electronic devices that require very little power . such devices include calculators and watches . a typical solar cell delivers much less power than a common dry cell .
 m comparing this with iv u r standard mirror formula i ū ū r i u mi transverse magnification m v u u v u ui uz u magnification m . i uu focal length f i m if the refracting surface is plane r v m dreal i u dapparent r .
we have just seen that some of the substances are conductors whereas others are insulators . we will now explain the reason for this difference in their behaviour .
berse fig . the image of a candle when it lies beyond the centre of curvature of a concave mirror .
linear magnification transverse magnification lateral magnification in this case . size of object and image is measured perpendicular to principal axis . height of image h height of object h from similar triangles apo and aʼpm . ao po a m pm h u h v h or m 
laws of refraction . the incident ray . the refracted ray and the normal to the refracting surface at the point of incidence are in the same plane . . the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction satisfy the equation sin i . sinr my of a pair of transparent media . the one that has the higher refractive index is called the optically denser medium of the two . while the one that has the lower refractive index is called the optically rarer medium . when light goes from the optically rarer medium to the optically denser medium . it bends towards the normal . and when it goes from the denser medium to the rarer medium . it bends away from the normal . the total reflection of light travelling in a medium of higher refractive index m when it is incident on the boundary with another medium of lower refractive index n . at an angle greater than the critical angle . is called total internal reflection . the critical angle is given by sini . . when a ray of light passes through a transparent slab with parallel faces . it is displaced parallel to itself . a lens that is thicker at the middle than at the edges is called a convex lens . while a lens that is thicker at the edges is called a concave lens . the central point of a lens is called its optical centre . a ray of light incident towards the optical centre passes almost undeviated through the lens .
point to remember is that the various distribution circuits are connected in parallel so that if a fault occurs in one circuit . its fuse will melt leaving the other circuit in operation . for example . the lighting circuit and power circuit in our home are in parallel so that if a short circuit occurs in . say the power circuit . then the power fuse will blow off but our lights will not go off because our lighting circuit will keep working .
action of a concave lens on a parallel beam of light rays is shown in figure . when a parallel beam of light rays falls on a concave lens . the rays will spread out or diverge after passing through the lens . since the refracted rays are diverging away from one another . they do not actually meet at a point . the diverging rays when produced backwards as shown by dotted lines in figure appear to meet at a point f on the left side of the lens . to a person on the right hand side . the refracted rays appear to be diverging or coming from a point f on the principal axis of the concave lens . this point is the principal focus of the concave lens . thus . the principal focus of a concave lens is a point on its principal axis from which light rays . originally parallel to the axis .
when the object is at infinity when the object is at a far off distance . we say that the object is at infinity . in figure . we have a convex mirror m . suppose an object an arrow pointing upwards has been placed at infinity in front of the convex mirror since the object is very far off . it cannot be shown in the diagram . because the object ab is very far off . the two rays ad and ap coming from its top point a are parallel to one another but at an angle to the principal axis as shown in figure . the ray ad gets reflected in the direction dx and the ray ap gets reflected in the direction py . when the diverging reflected rays dx and py are produced backwards as shown by dotted lines in figure . they intersect at point a in the focal plane of the convex mirror . thus . a is the virtual image of the top point a of the object . to get the full image of the object
centre of curvature . radius of curvature . pole and principal axis of a spherical mirror the centre of curvature of a spherical mirror is the centre of the hollow
uses spectacles for short sightedness spectacles for short sightedness
form an image at infinity . and since the image is formed at infinity . it is not possible to show it in our diagram . from this discussion we conclude that when an object is placed at the focus of a concave mirror . the image formed is i at infinity . ii real and inverted . and iii highly magnified or highly enlarged .
a solar panel is a group of a large number of solar cells connected in series .
 . . . uses of wind energy in fact . wind has a wide application in our day to day life . following are some important uses of wind energy . aeroplanes make use of wind energy to control their movement . gliders totally depend on the wind energy for their flight to propel . . wind energy is used in sailboats . . wind energy is used to drive windmills . several windmills have been installed in canada . denmark . netherlands . sweden . uk . usa and india . . wind energy is being used for generating electricity fig . . . wind energy is used to grind grain . . wind energy is used for pumping water .
incidence . for example . in figure . the angle of refraction r is not equal to the angle of incidence i . in this case the angle of refraction r is smaller than the angle of incidence i . we will give the reasons for this later on in this chapter . at the moment we will discuss why the refraction of light takes place on going from one medium to another .
laws of refraction of light refraction of light follows the following two laws 
 two lenses one of focal length cm convex lens and another of focal length cm concave lens are placed in contact . what is the focal length length and power of the combination ans . here . f cm . m f cm . m . f . p from relation f from relation . fi . f putting values . we get or f . m ē . . . . from relation . p . i . e . . p . d . 
it is also worth noting that if magnification is greater than one . then the image is bigger than the object and if it is less than one . then the image is smaller than the object . a magnification equal to one indicates that the image and the object are of the same size .
pollution caused by fossil fuels the main disadvantage of using fossil fuels is that the burning or combustion of fossils fuels causes a lot of pollution in the environment . this is explained below .
do you know the eye has a convex lens of focal length about . cm . focal length of an eye lens can be varied but cannot be decreased below a certain limit .
note i magnetic field inside a long solenoid is uniform i . e . . same at all points and strong . this magnetic field is represented by straight magnetic field lines parallel and very close to each other . ii magnetic field inside a long solenoid decreases as we move towards the ends of the solenoid because magnetic field lines near the ends of the solenoid start spreading out . iii magnetic field outside the solenoid is non uniform and weak . iv magnetic field lines inside the solenoid are from south pole to north pole and outside the solenoid . these lines of force are from north pole to south pole . v the magnetic field of the solenoid resembles the magnetic field of the bar magnet as shown in figure . vi the strong magnetic field produced inside a solenoid is used to magnetise the rod of a magnetic material like soft iron . when placed inside the bar magnet solenoid . f
the main switch is a double pole switch . this switch insulates the household electrical connections from the company s wires . this switch is capable of cutting off the live and the neutral wires simultaneously . from the main switch box . supply is distributed to all the rooms of the house .
reflection of light when a beam of light is incident on a polished interface and is sent back in same medium . this phenomenon is called reflection of light . normal n incident ray reflected ray mtttttttttttttttttt m point of incidence in reflection the frequency . speed and wavelength do not change . but a phase change may occur depending on the nature of reflecting surface .
power of accommodation the maximum variation in power of the lens to see nearby objects and distant objects clearly is called power of accommodation . power of accommodation of eye is the ability of the eye to observe distinctly the objects situated at widely different distances from the eye . on account of change in focal length of eye lens by the action of ciliary muscles holding the lens . the maximum power of accommodation of the eye for a person having normal vision d cm is p f d dioptre .
advantages of generating hydroelectricity the advantages of using the energy of flowing water for the generation of electricity are the following i the generation of electricity from flowing water does not produce any environmental pollution . ii flowing water is a renewable source of electric energy which will never get exhausted . iii the construction of dams on rivers helps in controlling floods . and in irrigation .
image as formed on the retina fig . astigmatic eye . cylindrical lens image as formed on the retina fig . correction of astigmatic eye with the help of cylindrical lens .
concave through the centre mirror a ray of light passing of curvature c figure .
before we end this discussion on solar energy . we would like to compare the fossil fuels and the sun as sources of energy . i the sun is a renewable source of energy but fossil fuels are a non renewable source of energy . ii the sun s energy does not cause any pollution but burning of fossil fuels causes a lot of pollution . iii the sun s energy is available in a diffused form scattered form but fossil fuels provide energy in concentrated form . iv a special device like solar cooker or solar cell is always needed to utilise sun s energy but this is not so in the case of fossil fuels . v the sun s energy is available only during the day time when the sun shines but energy of fossil fuels can be used all the time .
pollution caused by burning fossil fuels the burning of most fossil fuels causes air pollution . the pollutants produced include carbon dioxide . carbon monoxide . oxides of nitrogen . sulphur dioxide and unburnt particles . a burning of fossil fuels like coal and petrol produces carbon dioxide . excess carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is increasing the greenhouse effect . leading to unnatural global warming . b when coal and petrol do not burn completely . carbon monoxide is produced . excessive inhalation of this poisonous gas can cause death . c during the combustion of coal . sulphur present in it forms sulphur dioxide . oxides of nitrogen are formed when atmospheric nitrogen and oxygen combine at the high temperatures inside a running automobile engine . in the air . sulphur dioxide combines with oxygen and water to form sulphuric acid . oxides of nitrogen form nitric acid . these fall on the earth with rain . which we call acid rain . acid rain damages soil . water bodies . crops . living tissues and structures like the taj mahal . d the unburnt particles produced during the combustion of fossil fuels are carried by smoke . they affect our lungs . and blacken clothes and buildings . the pollution caused by burning coal can be greatly reduced by installing a tall chimney or by installing a precipitator . which is a device that reduces the amount of suspended matter in the smoke .
illustrations why series arrangement is not used for domestic circuits ans . in domestic circuits . series arrangement is not used because of the following reasons i the total potential difference available usually volts is divided between various appliances in the circuit according to their resistances since the current flowing through all the appliances is the same . thus . each appliance will not get the required potential difference for it to operate properly . ii if one of the appliances is out of order . e . g . . if a bulb gets fused . all the appliances in the circuit will stop working as the circuit gets broken . iii all the appliances will work simultaneously whether we want them to work or not . thereby involving a lot of power wastage . iv if we switch off any one of the appliances . the circuit is broken and all the appliances will stop working .
since work is measured in joule and charge in coulomb . therefore . electric potential is measured in joule per coulomb jc . this unit occurs so often in our study of electricity . that it has been named as volt . in honour of the scientist alessandro volta the inventor of the voltaic cell . thus . joule volt coulomb potential difference is said to be v when joule of work is done to move c of charge between two points .
advantages of hydroelectric power a hydroelectric power is pollution free . b hydroelectricity is cheapest source of energy . 
drawbacks i it is a dirty fuel . ii it is difficult to handle . iii coal burning results in the loss of many valuable volatile compounds . iv it causes pollution by emission of sulphur .
the central horizontal line in the figure is called the optic axis . the two focal lengths . both labelled f . are always equal for a thin lens even when both sides have different curvatures . as is clear from the figures a convex lens is thinner at the edges and thicker in the centre .
from the above discussion we conclude that the various factors which should be kept in mind while choosing a proper fuel for homes and factories are high calorific value absence of smoke and harmful gases or polluting gases on burning proper ignition temperature low cost and easy availability ease of handling . transportation and storage low non volatile content and a moderate rate of combustion . we will now take some examples to decide which of the two given fuels is a better fuel or a more ideal fuel .
 . t time period alternating current is expressed as . i . sinot or io sin m or . sinnft . . . i where . f is called frequency of a . c . the frequency of household supply of a . c . in india is hz . this means . a . c . completes cycles in one second . thus . a . c . changes direction after every second . in other words . a . c . used in india changes direction times in one second . in eqn . i . maximum or peak value of a . c . . i instantaneous value of a . c . at any time t . the variation of a . c . with time t is shown in the figure .
efficiency of solar heating device is much lower than that of electrical heating devices because solar energy is available in the diffused form and the energy of electric heating device is in concentrated form .
the main disadvantage of solar cells is that they are very expensive . this is due to the following reasons i the special grade silicon needed for making solar cells is expensive . ii silver wire used to interconnect solar cells for making solar cell panels is expensive . and iii the entire process of making solar cells is still very expensive . so . the extensive use of solar cells for generating electric power is limited due to their high cost . another disadvantage of solar cells is their low efficiency . they can convert only about per cent of the light energy falling on them into electricity .
unit of electric current the unit of electric current is ampere a . current through a point is one ampere . if one coulomb charge flows through that point in one second . i . e . . coulomb c ampere a s . second s 
is used as a rear view mirror in vehicles . it will give the driver a much smaller view of the road and traffic behind . rear view mirrors are also known as driving mirrors or side view mirrors or wing mirrors .
resistance the opposition offered by the conductor to the flow of electric current or charge through it is called its resistance . it is denoted by r and is measured in ohm denoted by 
generating electricity from ocean waves we can convert the energy of ocean waves into electricity at places where there are strong waves . figure . shows schematically one setup for generating electricity from waves . a large air filled object . called a surface follower . floats in the sea and moves up and down with the waves . it is linked to a shaft at the bottom of the sea in such a way that its up and down motion is converted into the rotational motion of the shaft . the rotation of the shaft is used to turn the shaft of an electric generator . ocean waves are caused by winds . since winds arise due to the heating of the earth s surface by the sun . the ultimate source of energy of ocean waves is the sun .
fuse a fuse is a safety device that does not allow excessive current to flow through an electric circuit . it consists of a metallic wire of low melting point . fixed between the two terminals of a fuse plug . the fuse plug fits into a fuse socket connected in the circuit . fuses are available in various shapes . figure . shows common types of fuses . the fuse plug shown in figure . a is used in household wiring . it is made of porcelain . the fuse plug shown in figure . b is used in electric appliances such as tvs . invertors . amplifiers . etc .
nn fig . diagram to verify joule s law of heating . heat produced in a resistor is given by any one of the following expressions . w rt v vit j j r j
unit of power in si . electric power is measured in watt w . if v is measured in volt and i in ampere . then watt ampere x volt the power consumed by a source is said to be watt if one ampere of current flows through it under a potential difference of volt . bigger units of electric power are kilowatt kw and megawatt mw kilowatt kw watt . megawatt mw w power of an agent is also expressed in horsepower hp hp watt
 . focus and focal length if a beam of light moving parallel to the principal axis of a convex lens is incident on it . the rays converge or meet at a point on the principal axis . this point f is called the second focus . similarly . if rays of flight starting from a point on the principal axis after refraction become parallel to the principal axis . then this point fi is called the first focus of the lens . the distance ofı or of is called the focal length fig . . it is denoted by f .
the pollution caused by burning fossil fuels can be somewhat reduced by increasing the efficiency of the combustion process and using various techniques to reduce the escape of harmful gases and ashes into the surroundings . besides being used directly for various purposes in gas stoves and vehicles . do you know fossil fuels are the major fuels used for generating electricity let us see how we can produce some electricity from the fossil fuels we use .
refracted ray ob bends away from the normal at point b by an equal amount . thus . the light emerges from a parallel sided glass slab in a direction parallel with that in which it enters the glass slab . though the emergent ray bc is parallel to the incident ray ao . but the emergent ray has been sideways displaced or laterally displaced from the original path of the incident ray by a perpendicular distance cd see figure . in figure . the original path of incident light is aod but the emergent light goes along bc . the lateral displacement between them being cd . the perpendicular distance between the original path of incident ray and the emergent ray coming out of the glass slab is called lateral displacement of the emergent ray of light . lateral displacement depends mainly on three factors angle of incidence . thickness of glass slab . and refractive index of glass slab . actually . lateral
the fission of an atom of uranium . for example . produces million times the energy produced by the combustion of an atom of carbon from coal .
we cannot join the battery wires directly to the two commutator half rings to pass current into the coil because if we do so . then the connecting wires will get twisted when the coil rotates . so . to pass in electric current to the coil . we use two carbon strips p and q known as brushes . the carbon brushes p and q are fixed to the base of the motor and they press lightly against the two half rings of the commutator . the battery to supply current to the coil is connected to the two carbon brushes p and q through a switch .
how to get a continuous flow of electric current we have just studied that it is due to the potential difference between two points that an electric current flows between them . the simplest way to maintain a potential difference between the two ends of a conductor so as to get a continuous flow of current is to connect the conductor between the terminals of a cell or a battery . due to the chemical reactions going on inside the cell or battery . a potential difference is maintained between its terminals . and this potential difference drives the current in a circuit in which the cell or battery is connected . for example . a single dry cell has a potential difference of . volts between its two terminals terminal and terminal . so . when a dry cell is connected to a torch bulb through copper connecting wires . then its potential difference causes the electric current to flow through the copper wires and the bulb . due to which the bulb lights up see figure . in order to maintain current in the external circuit . the cell has to expend the chemical energy which is stored in it . please note that the torch bulb used in the circuit shown in figure is actually a
suppose that initially the coil abcd is in the horizontal position as shown in figure . on pressing the switch . current from battery enters the coil through carbon brush p and commutator half ring x . the current flows in the direction abcd and leaves via ring y and brush q .
do you know electric fuses used in electrical circuits are rated as a . a . a . a . a etc . when we say . electric fuse is rated as a . it means the maximum current that can flow through the fuse wire without melting it is a . if an electric current flows through the electric circuit is more than a . then the fuse rated as a will melt and the circuit breaks . for such electric circuit . fuse rated as a is used .
people suffering from far sightedness have difficulty in reading a book or a newspaper . or viewing a small object placed close to the normal near point . n at cm . people suffering from far sightedness have to keep reading material or an object much farther away to see clearly . in other words . their near point . n . is farther than the normal near point . n figure . a and b . far sightedness is a defect of vision due to which a person is not able to clearly see objects placed at the normal near point .
case . when the object is between f and f object between f and f 
spherical lenses are of two types i convex and ii concave
uses of plane mirrors i plane mirrors are used to see ourselves . the mirrors on our dressing table and in bathrooms are plane mirrors . ii plane mirrors are fixed on the inside walls of certain shops like jewellery shops to make them look bigger . iii plane mirrors are fitted at blind turns of some busy roads so that drivers can see the vehicles coming from the other side and prevent accidents . iv plane mirrors are used in making periscopes . plane mirror we will now solve some problems based on plane mirrors .
we conclude the following from the above activity . a a current flows through a coil as long as a magnet moves near the coil . the coil moves near the magnet or both of them move . so . a current flows in the coil when there is relative motion between the magnet and the coil . b while there is relative motion between the magnet and the coil . the magnetic field around the coil keeps changing . the changing magnetic field causes a current in the coil .
electric current is defined as the rate of flow of electric charge . in si . electric current is measured in ampere a .
is not sensed . and hence . the object cannot be seen . this region is . therefore . called the blind spot of the eye . you can quite easily check for the existence of the blind spot in each eye . cover your right eye and look at the triangle in figure . . now slowly move the book towards your head .
energy from flowing water hydro energy
second law the ratio of sine of the incidence angle zi to the sine of the refracted angle zr is constant . it is denoted by n . sini . c . . sina n . . . i this constant is called refractive index of the second medium with respect to the first medium . refractive index of second medium with respect to the first medium is denoted by nı sini thus . eqn . i can be written as n sinr this law is called snell s law as it was stated by prof . willebrord snell dutch mathematician and astronomer .
b direction of a incident light lens left to right distances measured distances measured from optical centre c from optical centre to left side are taken c to right side are as negative taken as positive because they are because they are in against the direction the same direction
figure . shows a wire loop . a section ab of which lies in a motion magnetic field . a galvanometer is connected in the loop to detect current . in the figure . the magnetic field is from east to west . and the wire ab is perpendicular to this field . i . e . . it lies in the field south north direction . suppose the loop is pulled up vertically figure . a . a current will be induced in the loop . its direction will be from b to a . if the loop is pushed down vertically . the current current in the wire will be from a to b figure . b . fleming s right hand rule gives the direction of the induced current when a section of a loop passes through a field fig . . fleming s right hand perpendicular to it . rule if the forefinger . second finger and thumb of the right hand are stretched at right angles to each other . with the forefinger in the direction of the field and the thumb in the direction of the motion of the wire then the current in the wire is in the direction of the second finger . figure . illustrates the rule for the situation shown in figure . a . the forefinger and thumb are in the directions of the field and motion respectively . the stretched second finger gives the direction of the current . field is shown by the forefinger . current by the second finger . and motion by the thumb . 
 n . for the refraction at p . let the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction be i and r respectively . if the refractive index of the material of the slab is n . sin i . . . i sinr for the refraction at q . pq is the incident ray and qs is the refracted ray . since ab and cd are parallel . the normals to them are also parallel . hence . from geometry . the angle of incidence at q is r . let the angle of refraction be r . since for this refraction the slab is the first medium n n and air is the second medium n . we have from snell s law sinr sin r n or sin r n sinr . but from i . sin i n sin r . sin r sin i orr i . this means that the ray qs is parallel to the ray rp . thus . on passing through a transparent slab with parallel faces . a ray is displaced parallel to itself . that is . the ray is shifted laterally sideways . the amount by which the ray is displaced is proportional to the thickness of the slab . therefore . for a very thin slab for example . a sheet of thin glass the displacement is negligible .
the following table gives the detailed information about the images formed by a convex lens table . 
other rays useful in ray tracing the two special incident rays mentioned above are generally sufficient to locate an image formed by a spherical mirror . in addition . you can consider a ray that falls obliquely on the mirror after passing through the focus . after reflection . this ray becomes parallel to the principal axis . as shown in figure . .
if we know the height or size of the object and that of the image . then we can calculate the magnification by using the formula given above . many times . however . we do not know their heights . so we will now write another formula for calculating the magnification produced by a spherical mirror in terms of object distance and image distance .
 magnetic field on the axial point inside of solenoid of finite length b mgn cos . cos . 
eye is small as in a dark room or during night . the iris expands the pupil makes the pupil large so that more light may enter the eyes see figure . thus . the iris regulates or controls the amount of light entering the eye by changing the size of the pupil . the iris makes the pupil expand or contract according to the intensity of light around the eye . if the intensity of the outside light is low . then the pupil expands to allow more light to enter the eye . on the other hand . if outside intensity of light is high . then the pupil contracts so that less light enters the eye .
you know that current flows from the positive to the negative terminal to a battery . also . the direction of the field of a magnet is from the north to the south pole . so . based on your observations . you can say that the following are true for a current carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field . a a current carrying conductor experiences a force in a magnetic field .
rays meet at a point lying in the plane of the centre of curvature to form the real image of the object fig . . this image is real . inverted and equal to the size of the object . . when the object lies between the centre of curvature c and the focus f consider a ray starting from the top of the object and parallel
the colour of scattered light depends on the size of scattering particles the earth s atmosphere is a heterogeneous mixture of minute particles . these particles include suspended particles of dust . tiny water droplets and molecules of air the molecules of air means the molecules of gases like nitrogen and oxygen which make up the air . when light coming from the sun strikes the particles present in the atmosphere or air . then what happens to the light depends on its wavelength and the size of the particles it hits . this will become clear from the following discussion .
 . . nuclear fission the process of splitting of a heavy nucleus into two or more lighter nuclei with the liberation of energy is called nuclear fission . nuclear fission is a decay process in which an unstable nucleus splits into two fragments of comparable mass . fission was discovered in through the experiments of otto hahn and fritz strassman .
if a beam of light moving parallel to the principal axis is incident on a concave lens . the beam of light diverges . if these diverged rays are produced backward . they meet at a point f on the principal axis fig . . the i on me prmcipal axis rig . . the transmitted rays appear to come from this point . this point fi is called the first focus of the lens . similarly . point f on the principal axis is called the second focus of the lens the distance of . or of is called the focal length of the lens . it is denoted by f .
are cut from the forests for obtaining wood . then more trees will grow in the forest in due course of time . so . the loss of wood by cutting trees is made good by nature see figure . the renewable sources of energy are hydroenergy energy from flowing water wind energy solar energy energy from sea tidal energy . sea wave energy and ocean thermal energy geothermal energy biomass energy energy from bio fuels such as wood . biogas and alcohol and hydrogen .
principle it is based on the principle that when a current carrying conductor capable of moving freely is placed in a magnetic field . it experiences a force and begins to move in a direction given by fleming s left hand rule . construction a dc motor consists of the following components as shown in figure . .
the focus of concave mirror is in front of the mirror on the left side . so the focal length of a concave mirror is considered negative and written with a minus sign . say . cm . on the other hand . the focus of a convex mirror is behind the mirror on the right side . so the focal length of a convex mirror is positive and written with a plus sign . say cm or just cm .
the ability to attract small pieces of paper and are said to have electric charge .
of the convex lens . so . in this case . the object and its image are at equal distance f each from the convex lens . but they are on opposite sides of the lens . thus . when an object is placed at a distance f in front of a convex lens . then the image formed is i at a distance f on the other side of the lens . ii real and inverted . and iii of the same size as the object .
to determine the focal length of a convex lens . we put the convex lens in a holder or stand and keep it in front of a distant object like a window or a tree . so that the rays coming from the window pass through it . a cardboard screen is put behind the lens . we change the distance of the screen from the convex lens until a clear inverted image of the window is formed on the screen . measure the distance of the screen from the lens with a scale . this distance will be the focal length of convex lens . for example . if the image of a distant window is formed at a distance of cm from a convex lens . then the focal length of this convex lens will be cm . and before we end this discussion . here is a summary of the images formed by a convex lens .
first of all we will describe the wiring for an electric bulb . one end of the bulb holder is connected to the live wire through a switch sį and the other end of the bulb holder is connected to the neutral wire see figure . when we press the switch s . the circuit for bulb gets completed and it lights up . we will now describe the wiring for a three pin socket . one of the lower terminals of the socket t is connected to the live wire through a switch s and the second lower terminal is connected to the neutral wire . the upper terminal of the socket is connected to the earth wire see figure . let us now describe the wiring for a fan . the live wire is connected to one terminal of the fan through a switch and a regulator . the neutral wire is connected to the other terminal of the fan . we have not shown the wiring for a fan in figure . please do it yourself .
geothermal resources are classified as low temperature less than c or f moderate temperature c or f and high temperature greater than c or f . fig . a geothermal power plant in iceland .
activity corner to study refraction of light . place a coin c at the bottom of an empty metallic vessel as shown in figure a . now slowly move away from the vessel until you reach a place where the coin just disappears . now ask somebody to fill the vessel with water slowly without disturbing the position of the coin . maintain a steady gaze at the coin . the coin gradually begins to appear and can be seen completely from the same position of the eye after the level of water reaches a certain height .
 the images formed by a concave mirror can be either behind the mirror virtual or in front of the mirror real . so . the image distance v for a concave mirror can be either positive or negative depending on the position of the image . if an image is formed behind a concave mirror to the right side . the image distance v is positive but if the image is formed in front of the mirror on the left side . then the image distance will be negative .
fusion has the potential to provide vast amounts of electrical energy because there is a cheap . almost unlimited fuel supply the waters of the oceans . deuterium is abundant in sea water and tritium can be made from deuterium . a spoonful of deuterium . obtained from about litres of water .
note daten re . do . rerodos be go padres proddergator labels b stada a decibes bedcb lg bb built psrs ang contractor asiat ar or . ni sounds share odo cir gas autobaterra re do an anase ao according to this classification . firewood obtained by cutting trees is a renewable energy source . however . a tree usually takes more than years to mature . thus . replenishment of energy sources like wood takes a long time . but we continue to be largely dependent on fossil fuels for most of our energy requirements fig . . tood the usa ice oanasov qan bu obrado googte ga gegee hundegree ab peso de don pedro herboereras srs bers ar ezcan vo bede ee pribi be eur ro dobro osta geos fd so od og ssd cuccoger deres . antona agrotos seiros s zz coro . 
flowing water is a major source of energy . the electricity produced by the flowing water is known as hydroelectric power . a plant used to produce hydroelectric power is known as hydroelectric power plant .
coal was formed by the decomposition of large number of plants and trees that got buried under the earth millions of years ago may be due to natural calamity like earthquake or volcanoes . the slow chemical process of conversion of wood into coal at high temperature and pressure is called carbonisation .
biogas is a mixture of methane . carbon dioxide . hydrogen and hydrogen sulphide .
we can see the effect of atmospheric refraction by a simple observation as follows if we look at objects through the hot air over a fire . the objects appear to be moving slightly . this can be explained as follows the air just above the fire becomes hotter than the air further up . this hotter air is optically rarer but the colder air further up is optically denser . so . when we see the objects by the light coming from them through hot and cold air layers having different optical densities . then refraction of light takes place randomly due to which the objects appear to be moving slightly . this is an example of atmospheric refraction on a small scale .
construction of a dc generator figure . shows the basic design of a dc generator . which is very similar to that of a dc motor . the armature of the generator consists of a coil of many turns wound over a soft iron core . the armature is placed between the poles of a strong magnet . the ends of the coil are connected to a split ring commutator . two carbon brushes . b and b . press tightly against the two halves of the commutator . the brushes are connected to the fixed terminals . p and q . of the generator . electric devices such as an electric bulb can be connected to these terminals . as shown in the figure .
activity connect the ends of a small . thick aluminium or copper wire to two long . thin wires . use these wires to hang the aluminium wire from a support . connect the wires to a battery and switch . as shown in figure . a . place a horseshoe magnet as shown . the aluminium wire should swing freely between the poles . turn on the switch to pass a current . the aluminium wire will move . showing that the magnetic field exerts a force on it . note the direction in which the wire moves . turn the magnet upside down to change the direction of the magnetic field . now . when a current is passed through the wire . the wire moves in the opposite direction . the direction in which the wire moves also changes if you change the direction of the current by interchanging the connections to the battery . in this activity you can also use a disc or ring magnet kept below the wire . and if you have a bar magnet . place it vertically . below the wire . 
there are mainly three common refractive defects of vision . these are myopia near sightedness or short sightedness hypermetropia far sightedness or long sightedness presbyopia
 figure . the scattering of sunlight passing through the canopy of a forest . pa
a wind generator which is used to generate electricity by using wind energy is shown in figure . when the fast moving wind strikes the blades of wind turbine . then the wind turbine starts rotating continuously . the shaft of wind turbine is connected to a small generator . when the wind turbine rotates . its shaft also rotates and drives the generator . the generator produces electricity .
the temperature inside a box type solar cooker has a value between c to c . e . sarrosserie desease . diese tusubscess creed gees reserverendege bessebbenesesesse beece ceoes les gos ssssssssssssss seg beredo beebbero sebeeste ceeteeds r ed b bod bbs reset theodorradores sed scole abeeeeee greb ge warned ce e boldog seless see sosses sssred series besegreesco bercedebeeg be fig . a solar cooker having a concave reflector
 . electric fuse an electric fuse is a short length of easily fusible wire put into an electrical circuit for protection purposes . it is arranged to melt blow at a definite current . it is an alloy of lead and tin lead tin . it has a high resistivity and low melting point . as soon as the safe limit of current exceeds the fuse blows and the electric circuit is cut off . the fuse wire is usually encased in a cartridge of porcelain or similar material
the symbol for a single cell is shown in figure a . the symbol of a single cell consists of two parallel vertical lines . one thin and long and the other thick and short having horizontal lines on the sides . the longer vertical line represents the positive terminal of the cell so it is marked plus . . whereas the shorter vertical line represents the negative terminal of the cell so it is marked minus . . battery is a combination of two or more cells connected in series . in order to obtain a battery . the negative terminal of the first cell is joined with the positive terminal of the second cell . and so on . the symbol for a battery is shown in figure b . the battery shown in figure b consists of two cells joined together in series . we can also draw the symbol for a battery having more than two cells in a similar way .
slope of the graph i v is reciprocal of the resistance or resistance is reciprocal of the slope of the straight line .
at our home we receive v ac . in household circuit . three cored cables are used . each core cable is a copper wire capable of withstanding about a of current . normally . three coloured cables are used . in the old colour convention . the red wire is the live wire . black wire is the neutral wire and the green is earth wire . in the new colour convention . brown . called live wire . light blue . called neutral wire and green or yellow . called earth wire . the earth wire is for the safety of the user and saves from electric shocks .
of turbine is connected to a generator g . when the turbine rotates . its shaft also rotates and drives the generator . the generator produces electricity . the spent steam coming out of turbine chamber is cooled .
 ii two lines of force never intersect each other . if they ever did so . there would have been two tangents at the point of intersection . that is . two directions of magnetic field at one point . which is impossible .
rainbow it is the example of dispersion of sunlight . when sunlight falls on a water drop suspended in air . then the sunlight is refracted . the refracted sunlight splits or dispersed into its constituent colours i . e . . seven colours . thus . water drop suspended in air behaves as a glass prism . the red colour deviates the least and the violet colour deviated the most . different colours of refracted sunlight fall on the opposite face of the water drop . now . each colour is partly reflected back into the drop . the reflected colours on reaching the lower surface of water drop are refracted again into
the image which cannot be obtained on a screen is called a virtual image . a virtual image can be seen only by looking into a mirror or a lens . the image of our face formed by a plane mirror cannot be obtained on a screen . it can be seen only by looking into the mirror . so . the image of our face in a plane mirror is an example of virtual image see figure . virtual images are also called unreal images . a
 . cause of refraction and refractive index n when light passes from one medium into another . it is refracted because the speed of light is different in the two media . in general . one finds that the speed of light in any material is less than the speed of light in vacuum . it should be noted that greater the difference in the speed of light in the two media . greater is the bending of light . the extent of the bending that takes place in a given pair of media is expressed in terms of the refractive index . the constant appearing on the left hand side of equation . . in fact . light travels at its maximum speed in vacuum . it is convenient to define the refractive index . n of a medium to be the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum c to the speed of light in the given medium v . mathematically . we express it as speed of light in vacuum speed of light in medium c v . . . . 
activity keep a glass of water on a table . ask your friends to sit about m from the table . hold a coin in your hand and move it slowly near the glass . one by one your friends should cover one eye and say when the coin is just above the glass . when they say so . drop the coin . you will find that in most cases your friends judge the position of the coin wrongly . and the coin falls outside the glass . but if they look through both the eyes . they will be able to judge the position of the coin correctly most of the time . and the coin will drop into the glass . this happens because we are unable to judge depth . or the relative distances between objects . with one eye . especially when the objects are at some distance from the eye . two eyes are required to perceive depth . also . we can see a wider area with two eyes than with one eye .
ohm s law ohm s law gives a relationship between current and potential difference . according to ohm s law at constant temperature . the current flowing through a conductor is directly proportional to the potential difference across its ends . if i is the current flowing through a conductor and v is the potential difference or voltage across its ends . then according to ohm s law i a v at constant temp . this can also be written as v i or v rxi where r is a constant called resistance of the conductor . the value of this constant depends on the nature . length . area of cross section and temperature of the conductor . the above equation can also be written as v r . . . where v potential difference i current and r resistance which is a constant 
the renewable sources of energy are also called non conventional sources of energy . these sources of energy can be used again and again . endlessly . they will never get exhausted . since renewable sources of energy will never get exhausted . so they are also known as inexhaustible sources of energy . a yet another name for renewable sources of energy is the alternative sources of energy .
f um r r k lens maker s formula ml y my refractive index of lens tu . refractive index of medium ini which lens is kept thin lens formula if v equiconvex lens r r incident ray i object l equiconcave lens i incident ray c f object c u t c tario r r 
when current flows through the coil abcd . arms ab and cd experience magnetic force . according to fleming s left hand rule . arm ab of the coil . experiences a force in the upward direction and arm cd of the coil experiences a force in the downward direction . both these forces are equal but opposite in direction .
original toner drum xxx x x x x roller photocopy fig . . a material . the roller is initially positively charged . the material of the roller has the property of losing its charge when exposed to light . light reflected from the white portions of the original document falls on the roller and these portions of the drum lose their charge . the dark portions of the original do not reflect light and . therefore . the corresponding areas on the roller retain positive charge . for printing . a negatively charged toner special type of ink is used . the positively charged areas on the roller attract the negatively charged toner . as the drum rotates . the toner gets transferred to the paper . which passes in contact with the drum . this way . the dark portions on the original document are imaged on the paper .
factors on which lateral displacement depends lateral displacement is directly proportional to the thickness of glass slab . lateral displacement is directly proportional to the incident angle . lateral displacement is directly proportional to the refractive index of glass slab . lateral displacement is inversely proportional to the wavelength of incident light .
voltmeter is connected to a . and the terminal . to b . the reading of the voltmeter gives the potential difference across l . here . the current flowing through the voltmeter is different from those flowing through the other elements of the circuit . also . even if the voltmeter is removed . the current continues to flow in the circuit . note that the potential difference across l and the voltmeter is the same . such a connection is called a parallel connection .
magnetic field due to a straight current carrying conductor an electric current produces a magnetic field . the magnetic field lines due to a straight current carrying conductor are circular . with their centres on the wire . the direction of this field can be found by maxwell s right hand thumb rule . which states that if a straight current carrying wire is imagined to be held in the right hand . with the thumb stretched along the direction of the current . the direction of the magnetic field produced by the current is in the direction in which the fingers are curled .
these ideas are only experimental in nature . models have been made based on these ideas but it will be many years before full size wave energy generators can be built to harness the sea waves energy on a large scale . the harnessing of sea waves energy would be a viable proposition only at those places where sea waves are very strong .
a glass tumbler fig . . it appears to be bent at the interface of air and water .
e second principal focus second principal focus b first principal focus first principal focus a d fig . . if we stick to the convention that light is always incident from left to right on the lens . the first principal focus fy of a convex lens is on the left of the lens . and the second principal focus f . is on its right . for a concave lens . f is on the right and f is on the left of the lens . for a thin lens . the distances of fį and f . from the optical centre are the same . this distance is called the focal length of the lens . also . we usually use the word focus for each of the two principal focii . it is generally clear from the situation whether we are talking of for f . and a common symbol f is used for them . thus we can define the focus and focal length of a thin lens as follows . in a thin lens . rays incident parallel to the principal axis after passing through the lens converge to or appear to diverge from a point on the principal axis . and . the rays coming from a point on the principal axis or rays going towards a point on it become parallel to the principal axis after passing through the lens . each of these two points is called a focus of the thin lens . and the distance of the focus from the optical centre is called its focal length . usually . when we say focus . we mean the second principal focus . since a parallel beam of light incident on a convex lens converges on the other side . a convex lens is also called a converging lens figure . a . on the other hand . a parallel beam of light incident on a concave lens diverges on the other side figure . b . a concave lens is therefore also called a diverging lens .
figure . shows the essential parts of the eye . ciliary muscle choroid black sclerotic white of eye retina iris eye colour yellow spot fovea pupil lens optic nerve cornea transparent blind spot aqueous humour watery liquid vitreous humour jelly fig . the structure of the eye .
in ancient times . the energy of flowing water and blowing wind were used through water mills and wind mills respectively . for very limited purposes like running flour mills to grind grain to obtain flour and water lifting pumps . the energy of flowing water or wind is no longer used for these purposes . the energy of flowing water and that of wind is now used to generate electricity . so . the energy of flowing water and of wind is now considered to be a non conventional source of energy or alternative source of energy . we will now discuss the most commonly used conventional sources of energy called fossil fuels which include coal . petroleum and natural gas . they are also called conventional fuels .
electromagnet an electric current can be used for making temporary magnets known as electromagnets . an electromagnet works on the magnetic effect of current . let us discuss it in detail . we have just studied that when current is passed through a long coil called solenoid . a magnetic field is produced . it has been
the linear magnification produced by a mirror is equal to the ratio of the image distance to the object distance . with a minus sign . that is . image distance magnification object distance or m where m magnification v image distance ace и
 . when the object lies at the focus f consider two rays starting from the object placed at the focus . after reflection from the mirror these rays become parallel to the principal axis . these two reflected rays being parallel to each other meet at infinity to form the image of the object fig . . this image is real . inverted and extremely magnified .
principle of electric generator the electric generator is an application of electromagnetic induction . the electric generator works on the principle that when a straight conductor is moved in a magnetic field . then current is induced in the conductor . in an electric generator . a rectangular coil having straight sides is made to rotate rapidly in the magnetic field between the poles of a horseshoe type magnet . when the coil rotates . it cuts the magnetic field lines due to which a current is produced in the coil . electric generators are of two types . alternating current generator a . c . generator . and . direct current generator or d . c . generator . please note that a . c . generator is also written as a . c . generator and d . c . generator is also written as d . c . generator . we will now discuss both the types of electric generators . one by one . let us start with the a . c . generator .
we know that though stars twinkle at night but planets do not twinkle at all . this can be explained as follows the stars appear very . very small to us because they are very . very far off . so . stars can be considered to be point sources of light . the continuously changing atmosphere is able to cause variations in the light coming from a point sized star due to refraction because of which the star appears to be twinkling . on the other hand . the planets appear to be quite big to us because they are much nearer to the earth . so . a planet can be considered to be a collection of a very large number of point sources of light . the dimming effect produced by some of the point sources of light in one part of the planet is nullified by the brighter effect produced by the point sources of light in its other part . thus . on the whole . the brightness of a planet always remains the same and hence it does not appear to twinkle . we can now say that the continuously changing atmosphere is unable to cause variations in the light coming from a big sized planet due to refraction because of which the planet does not twinkle at all .
we find that a potential difference is induced in the coil whenever the electric current through the coil is changing starting or stopping . coil is called the primary coil and coil is called the secondary coil . as the current in the first coil changes . the magnetic field associated with it also changes . thus . the magnetic field lines around the secondary coil also change . hence . the change in magnetic field lines associated with the secondary coil is the cause of induced electric current in it .
 . refraction through a glass prism a prism is a refracting medium bounded by intersecting plane surfaces that both disperse and deviate light . the two plane surfaces meet along an edge at a certain angle . these planes are called the refracting surfaces . the edge is called the refracting edge and the angle is called the angle of prism or the refracting angle . a prism may be bounded by any number of surfaces but the surface on which light is incident and the surface from which light emerges must be plane and non parallel .
the design of an electric motor is shown in figure . a . a motor basically consists of a coil placed in a magnetic field . the coil is formed by winding many turns of insulated copper wire over a soft iron core . the core and the coil together form the armature . the armature is fixed on the shaft of the motor and kept between the poles of a strong magnet . the two free ends of the coil
procedure the circuit is connected as shown in figure . . the rheostat is varied to adjust the value of potential in the circuit . for some known values of potential the corresponding values of current is noted with the help of the ammeter . this gives a number of sets of observations of potential and current . a graph is plotted between voltage along x axis and current along y axis . the graph is found to be a straight line fig . . this verifies ohm s law . the reciprocal of the slope of the graph gives the value of the resistance of the resistor .
if the direction of the current is reversed . the field lines will still be circular . but the directions of the field lines will be reversed figure . b . this means . the north pole of the needle will point in the opposite direction . you can also sprinkle iron filings on the cardboard to see how the field lines are arranged . while a current is passing through the wire . gently tap the cardboard . the iron filings will get arranged in concentric circles . suggesting that the field lines due to a current passing through a straight wire are circular .
 ii non renewable sources of energy or conventional sources of energy those sources of energy which have been accumulated in nature over a very long time millions of years and cannot be quickly replaced if once exhausted are called non renewable sources of energy . the formation of fossil fuels like coal . petroleum and natural gas . have occurred over millions of years due to certain very slow changes under special circumstances . since these conditions are not prevailing now . the fossil fuels are rare . these sources of energy are . therefore . classified as non renewable sources .
electromagnet we know that the magnetic field inside a current carrying solenoid is uniform . this property of a solenoid is used to magnetise magnetic materials . an electromagnet is a temporary strong magnet and is just a solenoid with its winding on a soft iron core .
refraction of light by spherical lenses we have all seen a palmist using a lens called magnifying glass for seeing the details of the lines of a person s palm . a watch maker also uses a lens to see the extremely small parts of a watch clearly . in fact . lenses play a very important role in our everyday life . lenses are used in making spectacles . cameras . microscopes . telescopes . film projectors . and many . many other optical instruments . we have already studied that the working of a mirror is based on the reflection of light rays from its surface . the working of a lens is based on the refraction of light rays when they pass through it . we will now study the formation of images by lenses in detail . before we do that . we should know the various types of spherical lenses and the terms like optical centre . principal axis . principal focus or just focus . and focal length . etc . . which are used in the study of refraction of light by lenses . these are discussed below .
 iii near the magnetic poles where the field is stronger . the lines of force are closer . going away from the poles . the field becomes weaker and the lines become rarer . thus . larger the number of lines of force at a given point . stronger is the magnetic field at that point .
differences between emf and terminal potential difference electromotive potential force difference v . it is a cause . when it is an effect . when emf is applied . the current flow . the current flows in the potential drops circuit . across resistance . . it is the maximum it has a value potential difference always less than the between two emf . terminals of a cell . . it is the work done it is the work done by a source in in taking a unit taking a unit charge charge between once around the two points across a complete circuit . resistance .
since a concave mirror can produce virtual images as well as real images . the magnification produced by a concave mirror can be either positive or negative . a convex mirror . however . forms only virtual images . so the magnification produced by a convex mirror is always positive . another point to be noted is that if the magnification m has a value greater than then the image is bigger than the object . that is . the image is magnified or enlarged . and if the magnification m is exactly . then the image is of the same size as the object . but if the magnification is less than then the image is smaller than the object or diminished .
 . oersted s discovery in . oersted was able to show that an electric current flowing through a wire produces a magnetic field around it . oersted s observation was the first that indicated a connection between electricity and magnetism .
ohm s law the current through a metallic element is proportional to the potential difference applied between its ends . provided the temperature remains constant . v ir . where r is the resistance of the element . the si unit of resistance is the ohm . if a potential difference of volt is applied across
illustrations eye is more sensitive to yellow colour . why do then we use traffic light stop signals of red colour ans . according to rayleigh s law of scattering . the intensity of light of wavelength a present in the scattered light is inversely proportional to fourth power of wavelength . i a . in the visible spectrum . red colour has the largest wavelength . it is least scattered and can be easily observed even in foggy and dust conditions .
basic definitions medium substance through which light propagates or tends to propagate is called medium . it is of following three kinds transparent it is a medium through which light can propagate easily . e . g . glass . water etc . translucent it is a medium through which light is propagated partially e . g . oil paper . ground glass etc . opaque it is a medium through which light cannot be propagated e . g . wood . iron etc . 
procurement mining the coal is procured from coal mines . mineable coal is defined as of all coal which is in a layer of atleast inches thick and within feet of the surface .
 . . pollution caused by fossil fuels one of the major causes of pollution of the atmosphere is the combustion of fossil fuels to meet our daily requirements of energy . fossil fuels cause air pollution in the following ways . the combustion of fossil fuels results in the formation of carbon dioxide . which is released into the atmosphere . thus . concentration of co is increasing in the atmosphere . carbon dioxide has to ability to absorb infrared radiation emitted by the earth and re radiate it back . this effect is known as greenhouse effect . it is speculated that if the
look at figure in which a ray of light ao is going from medium to medium as ob . the speed of light in medium is different from that in medium . let the speed of light in medium be vi and that in medium be v . now . the refractive index of medium with respect to medium is equal to the ratio of speed of light in medium to the speed of light in medium .
advantages of lpg lpg has the following advantages when used as fuel i it has a high calorific value . its calorific value is about kj g ii on burning it does not produce any smoke and does not cause pollution . iii it is easy to handle and convenient to store . iv it does not produce harmful gases on burning .
working of a motor when an electric current is passed into the rectangular coil . this current produces a magnetic field around the coil . the magnetic field of the horseshoe type magnet then interacts with the magnetic field of the current carrying coil and causes the coil to rotate or spin continuously . the working of a motor will become more clear from the following discussion .
there is a switch . switches are always connected to the live wires . figure . a shows how the wiring of a room might look . in a socket and switch set . the live terminal of the socket gets connected to the live wire only when the switch is turned on . for this . the connections are made as shown in figure . b .
refraction of light through a prism figure shows the principal section of a prism dbc with angle a . consider a ray of light pq incident on
magnification it is defined as the ratio of size of image to the size of object . it is represented by m . size of image i m size of object 
make a narrow slit on a stiff piece of paper and make it stand vertically . allow sunlight or torchlight to fall on the slit . to create a narrow beam of light . let this beam fall on a rectangular face of a prism placed near a wall . light will pass through the prism and fall on the wall . rotate the prism till you see a band of colours on the wall . activity
when a ray of light goes from a rarer medium to a denser medium . its speed decreases or it slows down . on the other hand . when a ray of light goes from a denser medium to a rarer medium . then its speed increases or it speeds up . so . we can now say that a ray of light travelling from a rarer medium to a denser medium slows down and bends towards the normal but when a ray of light travels from a denser medium to a rarer medium . it speeds up and bends away from the normal .
uses of solar cells . solar cells are used for providing electricity in artificial satellites and space probes . . solar cells are used for providing electricity to remote . inaccessible and isolated places where normal electricity transmission lines do not exist .
position of image at the principal focus or in the focal plane between the principal focus and centre of curvature at the centre of curvature beyond centre of curvature at infinity behind the mirror
the resistivities of materials such as silicon and germanium are times more than that of metals . but times less than that of insulators like fused quartz . such materials are called semiconductors . semiconductors are
 . according to the first law of refraction of light the incident ray . the refracted ray and the normal at the point of incidence . all lie in the same plane . for example . in figure . the incident ray ao . the refracted ray ob . and the normal on . all lie in the same plane which is the plane of the paper here .
electric potential when a small positive test charge is placed in the electric field due to another charge . it experiences a force . so work has to be done on the positive test charge to move it against this force of repulsion . p p infinity bringing a unit positive charge q from electric field of a charged infinity to a point p in an electric field of a charged body a body a the electric potential or simply potential at a point in an electric field is defined as the amount of work done in bringing a unit positive charge from infinity to that point without acceleration . electric potential is a scalar quantity and it is denoted by v . if w is the amount of work done in bringing a unit charge q from infinity to a point . then the electric potential v at that point is given by . work done w electric potential . v charge the si unit of electric potential is volt . joule j the si unit of work is joule j and that of charge is coulomb c . so . volt coulomb 
during high tide . when the level of water in the sea is high . sea water flows into the reservoir of the barrage and turns the turbines see figure a . the turbines then turn the generators to produce electricity . and during the low tide . when the level of sea water is low . the sea water stored in the barrage reservoir is allowed to flow out into the sea . this flowing water also turns the turbines and generates electricity see figure b . thus . as sea water flows in and out of the tidal barrage during high and low tides . it turns the turbines to generate electricity . the tidal energy is not likely to be a potential source of energy in future because of the following reasons i there are very few sites around the world which are suitable for building tidal barrages or tidal dams .
when light is going from one medium other than vacuum or air to another medium . then the value of refractive index is called relative refractive index . for example . when the light is going from water into glass . then the value of refractive index will be the relative refractive index of glass with respect to water . the relative refractive index has always two subscripts with its symbol n which indicate the two media in which the light travels . for example . for the light going from water to glass . the refractive index is written as watern glass or wnę . the symbol watern glass means that it is the refractive index of glass with respect to water . that is . it is the refractive index of glass for light entering from water into glass .
the advantage of otec over tidal wave energy is that one does not have to wait for the tides .
combination of resistors two or more resistors are said to be connected in series if the current flowing through one also flows through the rest . the total potential difference across the combination is equal to the sum of the potential differences across the individual resistors . if resistors are connected in such a way that the same potential difference gets applied to each of them . they are said to be connected in parallel . the total current flowing into the combination is equal to the sum of the currents through the individual resistors .
 . due to the construction of dam on the river . the fish in the downstream area do not get sufficient nutrient materials due to which the production of fish decreases rapidly because the fish nutrients remain trapped in the reservoir formed by the dam .
this is also what happens when white light is incident on a rectangular glass slab the light does suffer dispersion inside the glass slab . but they emerge into air on the opposite side parallel to each other and also to the original ray . the eye lens focuses these parallel rays of different colours to one spot on the retina and we see white light .
 disconnect coil a from the battery . you will observe that the pointer of the galvanometer moves . but to the opposite side and quickly returns to zero indicating a momentary current in coil b . however . this current flows in the opposite direction in coil b a shown in figure c . coil a coil b hhhh log c momentary current in coil b . the current flows in the opposite direction .
myopia is due to the following reasons either the eyeball is longer than normal or ii the maximum focal length due to excessive curvature of the eye lens of the lens is insufficient to produce a clearly formed image on the retina . com fig . a corrected myopia eye .
when the object is at f . virtual . erect . diminished and on the same side of the object . f f b 
 . second law the ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence to the sine of the angle of refraction is a constant for a given pair of media . and this constant is called the refractive index of the medium .
since the potential difference v across both the resistances r and r in parallel is the same . so by applying ohm s law to each resistance separately . we get . . . and . . . now . putting the values of i . and from equations . and in equation . we get v . v . v rr r or cancelling v from both sides . we get r rr thus . if two resistances r and r are connected in parallel . then their resultant resistance r is given by the formula . r r r 
magnetic field lines a magnetic field is described by drawing the magnetic field lines . when a small north magnetic pole is placed in the magnetic field created by a magnet . it will experience a force . and if the north pole is free . it will move under the influence of magnetic field . the path traced by a north magnetic pole free to move under the influence of a magnetic field is called a magnetic field line . in other words . the magnetic field lines are the lines drawn in a magnetic field along which a north magnetic pole would move . the magnetic field lines are also known as magnetic lines of force . the direction of a magnetic field line at any point gives the direction of the magnetic force on a north pole placed at that point . since the direction of magnetic field line is the direction of force on a north pole . so the magnetic field lines always begin from the n pole of a magnet and end on the s pole of the magnet see figure . inside the magnet . however . the direction of magnetic field lines is from the s pole of the magnet to the n pole of the magnet . thus . the magnetic field lines are closed curves . the magnetic field lines due to a bar magnet are shown in figure . when a small compass is moved along a magnetic field line . the compass needle always sets itself along the line tangential to it . so . a line drawn from the south pole of the compass needle to its north pole indicates the direction of the magnetic field at that point . we will now describe how the magnetic field lines or magnetic field produced by a bar magnet can be plotted on paper .
starting from the upper point a of the object ab . we draw a line ad parallel to the principal axis . now . according to the first rule of image formation . this parallel ray ad should appear to be coming from focus f after refraction . so . we join df by a dotted line and produce fd upwards in the direction
fig . the coin seems to be raised when water is poured in a tumbler due to refraction of light .
to sense image information . the retina has two types of sense receptors . they are called rods and cones named so because that is how they look under high magnification . there are about million cones and million rods on the retina . the rods can sense very small amounts of light . while the cones need more light to perform their task of sensing colours and details . that is why in dim light we are able to see shapes but not colours and details . the rods and cones are actually the ends of special light sensitive nerve cells . the long fibres or axons of these nerve cells come together at a point on the retina to form an optic nerve . which is connected to the brain . when light falls on the rods and cones . electrical signals are generated . these signals are transmitted to the brain via the optic nerves . there are no rods or cones at the spot where the optic nerve leaves the eyeball . if an image is formed on this region of the retina . it
 . . ocean thermal energy ote as the solar radiations fall directly on the upper layer of oceans . they cause a temperature difference between the layers of ocean . there can be difference in temperature upto c at some places . this difference in temperature between the levels of oceans can be used to generate electricity . this energy is called ocean thermal energy ote .
 x g of coal 
 c the direction of the current depends on the direction of the magnetic field . that is why it changes when the pole facing the coil is changed . d the direction of the current depends on whether the magnetic field around the coil is increasing or decreasing . the magnetic field around the coil increases as the coil and magnet come closer . and decreases as they move apart . that is why the current flows in one direction on moving the magnet towards the coil and in the opposite direction on moving the magnet away from the coil . a current produced by a changing magnetic field is called an induced current . this phenomenon is called electromagnetic induction . electromagnetic induction the phenomenon in which an electric current is induced in a circuit because of a changing magnetic field is called electromagnetic induction . electromagnetic induction was discovered by michael faraday in . this important discovery revealed another link between electricity and magnetism . not only can we use an electric current to produce a magnetic field . we can also use a magnetic field to produce an electric current .
combination of lenses let lenses l . and l have focal lengths fı and f and powers p and p respectively . they are very thin so that their optical centers c and c lie very close . let for the combination . focal length f . power p lens lį . forms real image of point object o at point l . l acts as virtual object for lens l . which makes final real image at i .
total internal reflection let a ray of light travel from a medium of higher refractive index n . to a medium of lower refractive index n . as shown in figure . a . go n na n ny n ng n a b c fig . . after refraction . the ray of light bends away from the normal . therefore . the angle of refraction is greater than the angle of incidence . i . e . . r i . now . if the angle of incidence i increases . the angle of refraction r increases . for a particular value of i . called the critical angle ic . the angle of refraction becomes figure . b . the refracted ray then comes out parallel to the surface separating the two media . what happens for an angle of incidence greater than the critical angle you would expect the angle of refraction to be more than . this would bring the ray back into the first medium . but that would not be refraction . this means that for an angle of incidence greater than ic . refraction is not possible . so . the ray reflects back into the first medium . this reflection obeys the laws of reflection . and therefore . r in figure . c . such a reflection is called total internal reflection . remember that total internal reflection takes place only for light travelling from a medium of higher refractive index to a medium of lower refractive index . the total reflection of light travelling in a medium of higher refractive index when it is incident on the boundary with another medium of lower refractive index at an angle greater than the critical angle . is called total internal reflection . why total you know that when light falls obliquely on the interface between two transparent media . a small part of the light is reflected into the first medium . but when the angle
uses used as a rear view mirror and reflectors in street lights used as rear view mirror and reflectors in street lights
direction of veeleell direction of magnetic field current figure . maxwell s corkscrew rule to find the direction of magnetic field .
assumptions and sign convention while dealing with the reflection of light by spherical mirrors . we shall follow a set of sign conventions called the new cartesian sign convention . the conventions are as follows . the object is always taken on left side of the mirror . all distances are measured from the pole of the mirror . distances actually traversed in the direction of light are taken as positive and those in the opposite direction are taken as negative . all the distances above the principal axis are considered to be positive and below the principal axis are considered to be negative .
distribution of current in two resistors in parallel consider the circuit in figure . . the resistors r . and r . are connected in parallel . the current i gets distributed in the two resistors . we have i iq iz . applying ohm s law to the resistor rı . va vb r . . and applying ohm s law to the resistor r . va vb ri . in ii iii knin from ii and iii . ryin ri or r fig . . 
 . when the object lies at the principal focus f consider two rays starting from the top of the object placed at focus f . one ray is parallel to the principal axis which after refraction passes through the focus f . the second ray of light incident on the optical centre passes as such . the two refracted rays meet at infinity . therefore . the image is formed at infinity fig . . when the object lies at f . then . the image is formed at infinity . . the image is real . inverted and extremely magnified . . it is used in spotlights .
mirror b convex object image figure . formation of image by a convex mirror when the object is placed anywhere between the pole of mirror and infinity .
nuclear fission is named after the biological fission process of cell division .
activity in this activity we will use the convex lens of a magnifying glass . first find the approximate focal length f of the lens . then fix it vertically on a stand . draw a long straight line on a table and place the lens stand on it . the principal axis of the lens should be parallel to and exactly above the line on the table . on one side of the stand mark the points ę and on the line . at distances f and f respectively from the lens . similarly . mark ę and f one the other side of the stand . make a small screen of stiff paper and fix it on another stand . the screen should be vertical . with its centre at about the same height as the principal axis of the lens . place the screen stand on the line drawn on the table . light a candle and place it on the line such that the lens is between the candle and the screen . the flame of the candle should be at about the same height as the principal axis of the lens . move the
real image k o virtual object plane mirror showing real image formation of a virtual object real object virtual image plane mirror forming virtual image of a real object